adam cohen
If you're going to call a book ''The Politically Incorrect Guide to American History,'' readers will expect some serious carrying on about race, and Thomas Woods Jr. does not disappoint. He fulminates against the Civil Rights Act of 1964, best known for forcing restaurants and bus stations in the Jim Crow South to integrate, and against Brown v. Board of Education. And he offers up some curious views on the Civil War -- or ''the War of Northern Aggression,'' a name he calls ''much more accurate.''The introduction bills the book as an effort to ''set the record straight,'' but it is actually an attempt to push the record far to the right. More than a history, it is a checklist of arch-conservative talking points. The New Deal public works programs that helped millions survive the Depression were a ''disaster,'' and Social Security ''damaged the economy.'' The Marshall Plan, which lifted up devastated European nations after World War II, was a ''failed giveaway program.'' And the long-discredited theory of ''nullification,'' which held that states could suspend federal laws, ''isn't as crazy as it sounds.''It is tempting to dismiss the book as fringe scholarship, not worth worrying about, but the numbers say otherwise. It is being snapped up on college campuses and, helped along by plugs from Fox News and other conservative media, it recently soared to No. 8 on the New York Times paperback nonfiction best-seller list. It is part of a boomlet in far-right attacks on mainstream history that includes books like Jim Powell's ''FDR's Folly,'' which argues that Franklin Roosevelt made the Depression worse, and Michelle Malkin's ''In Defense of Internment,'' a warm look back on the mass internment of Japanese-Americans during World War II.It is not surprising, in the current political climate, that liberal pieties are being challenged, and many of them ought to be. But the latest revisionist histories are disturbing both because they are so extreme -- even Ronald Reagan called the Japanese internment a ''grave wrong'' and signed a reparations law -- and because they seem intent on distorting the past to promote dangerous policies today. If Social Security contributed to the Depression, it makes sense to get rid of it now. If internment was a good thing in 1942, think what it could do in 2005. And if the 14th Amendment, which guarantees minorities ''equal protection of the law,'' was never properly ratified -- as Mr. Woods argues -- racial discrimination may be constitutional after all.At the start of the ''Politically Incorrect Guide to American History,'' Mr. Woods says he is not trying to offer ''a complete overview of American history.'' That frees him to write a book in which major historical events that do not fit his biases are omitted, in favor of minutiae that do. The book has nothing to say about the Trail of Tears, in which a fifth of the Cherokee population was wiped out, or similar massacres, but cheerfully points out that ''by its second decade Harvard College welcomed Indian students.''The ''Politically Incorrect Guide'' is full of dubious assertions, small and large. It makes a perverse, but ideologically loaded, linguistic argument that the American Civil War was not actually a civil war, a point with which dictionaries disagree. More troubling are the book's substantive distortions of history, like its claim that the infamous Black Codes, passed by the Southern states after the Civil War, were hardly different from Northern anti-vagrancy laws. The Black Codes -- which were aimed, as the Columbia University historian Eric Foner has noted, at keeping freed slaves' status as close to slavery as possible -- went well beyond anything in the North.The book reads less like history than a call to action, since so many of its historical arguments track the current political agenda of the far right. It contends that federal courts were never given the power to strike down state laws, a pet cause of states' rights supporters today. And it maintains that the First Amendment applies only to the federal government, and therefore does not prohibit the states from imposing religion on their citizens, a view that Clarence Thomas has suggested in his church-state opinions.Most ominously, it makes an elaborate argument that the 14th Amendment was ''never constitutionally ratified'' because of irregularities in how it was adopted. This, too, is a pet cause of the fringe right, one the Supreme Court has rejected. If it prevailed, it would undo Brown v. Board of Education and many other rulings barring discrimination based on race, religion and sex. But Mr. Woods does not carry his argument to its logical conclusion. If the 14th Amendment was not properly ratified, neither, it would seem, was the 13th, which was adopted under similar circumstances, and slavery should be legal.These revisionist historians have started meeting pockets of resistance from those who believe they are rewriting reality to suit an ideological agenda. A group called Progress for America recently produced an ad that, incredibly, used Franklin Roosevelt's picture to support President Bush's plan to privatize Social Security. But Progress for America lost the public relations war when James Roosevelt Jr., F.D.R.'s grandson, announced that his grandfather ''would surely oppose the ideas now being promoted by this administration.''Then there was the large Christian school in North Carolina that assigned its students a booklet called ''Southern Slavery: As It Was.'' At first, the school argued that the booklet -- which describes slavery as ''a relationship based upon mutual affection and confidence'' -- simply provided a valuable ''Southern perspective.'' But after North Carolina newspapers reported on its contents, and quoted local pastors expressing their concern, the school quietly withdrew the text last month, apologizing for the ''oversight.''Editorial ObserverWhen Grover Norquist, a leading conservative activist, was on the NPR program ''Fresh Air'' a while back, he casually made a comparison that left the host, Terry Gross, sputtering in disbelief. ''Excuse me,'' she said. ''Did you just compare the estate tax with the Holocaust?'' Yes, he did.We are living in the age of the false, and often shameless, analogy. A slick advertising campaign compares the politicians working to dismantle Social Security to Franklin D. Roosevelt. In a new documentary, ''Enron: The Smartest Guys in the Room,'' Kenneth Lay compares attacks on his company to the terrorist attacks on the United States.Intentionally misleading comparisons are becoming the dominant mode of public discourse. The ability to tell true analogies from false ones has never been more important. But to make room for the new essay portion of the SAT that was rolled out this weekend with much fanfare, the College Board has unceremoniously dropped the test's analogy questions, saying blandly that analogical reasoning will still be assessed ''in the short and long reading passages.''Replacing logic questions with writing is perfectly in keeping with these instant-messaging, 500-cable-channel times, when the emphasis is on communicating for the sake of communicating rather than on having something meaningful to say. Obviously, every American should be able to write, and write well. But if forced to choose between a citizenry that can produce a good 25-minute writing sample or spot a bad analogy, we would be better off with a nation of analogists.To the literature of embarrassing childhood revelations, let me add this: When I was growing up there was a Miller Analogies workbook on our living room bookshelf, and I spent many a happy hour flipping through the pages and quizzing myself. The questions looked something like this:Poverty: money::(A)Wealth: gold; (B) Hunger: food; (C) Car: Driver; (D) Cook: Stove.On a good day, I would guess (B), because just as poverty stems from a shortage of money, hunger is the result of a shortage of food.Questions of this sort are the building blocks of arguments by analogy, which are a mainstay of many disciplines. Philosophers like Aristotle relied on analogies to reason about man and nature. Scientists have long analogized from things they know to things they do not, to form hypotheses and plot experiments.Law is almost entirely dependent on analogies. In my first year of law school, my contracts professor, Gerald Frug, said something brilliant in its simplicity: ''All things are alike in some ways and different in other ways.'' It was a warning that for the next three years, we would hear endless arguments that a case must be decided a particular way because a previous case or a statute required it. The two cases, or the case and the statute, would always be alike in some ways and different in others -- and law school was really about arguing whether the similarities or the differences were more important.Nowhere are analogies more central than in politics. When Karl Marx wanted to arouse the workers of the world, he compared the proletariat's condition to slavery and, in ''The Communist Manifesto,'' urged them to throw off their figurative chains. When Roosevelt argued for a balanced budget, he put it in homespun terms. ''Any government, like any family, can for a year spend a little more than it earns,'' he said. ''But you and I know that a continuation of that habit means the poorhouse.''The power of an analogy is that it can persuade people to transfer the feeling of certainty they have about one subject to another subject about which they may not have formed an opinion. But analogies are often undependable. Their weakness is that they rely on the dubious principle that, as one logic textbook puts it, ''because two things are similar in some respects they are similar in some other respects.'' An error-producing ''fallacy of weak analogy'' results when relevant differences outweigh relevant similarities. On ''Fresh Air,'' Mr. Norquist seized on a small similarity between the estate tax and Nazism and ignored the big difference: that the Holocaust, but not the estate tax, involved the murder of millions of people.The last election was decided, in significant part, on specious analogies. A man who went to war, and came back to protest that war, was compared -- by a group whose name helpfully contained the phrase ''for truth'' -- to men who betray their country. Today, the federal tax system -- which through much of the nation's history kept government income and expenditures in rough balance -- is being compared to ''theft'' and recklessly dismantled.The College Board's Web site explanation that analogies are being dropped because they are ''less connected to the current high school curriculum'' itself shows a stunning lack of logic, since it does not explain what the ''less connected'' refers to. Less connected than they used to be? Than other parts of the test? But in any case, it is a dangerous concession. Since the SAT no longer contains analogy questions, here is one: A nation whose citizens cannot tell a true analogy from a false one is like -- fill in your own image for precipitous decline.Editorial ObserverWhen a young person visits, you should throw him off balance by saying, ''You want a wash, I expect,'' in a way that suggests he has not quite mastered personal hygiene. An older man should be told how fine it is that his wife is still ''moving very briskly about.'' And visitors of all ages should be encouraged to talk about their friends, after which you should say that you ''wished B. was here'' because you never tell ''stories behind people's backs.''These pointers come from ''Lifemanship,'' one of a series of acerbic life guides written by Stephen Potter in the 1940's and 1950's. ''Lifemanship,'' which has just been reissued by Moyer Bell, wryly mocked Dale Carnegie's ''How to Win Friends and Influence People,'' and other self-help manuals of its day. Potter's books do not focus on friendship or success, but on less exalted goals: ''winning without actually cheating'' (''Gamesmanship''); ''creative intimidation'' (''One-Upmanship''); and making ''the other man feel that something has gone wrong, however slightly'' (''Lifemanship'').The absurdist ''Monty Python's Spamalot'' may be the toast of Broadway, but it is Potter's caustic brand of British humor that is especially in step with our times. His targets -- wine snobs, literary poseurs and weekend athletes -- are more numerous today than a half-century ago. His major themes -- the drive for self-improvement, competitiveness, faking it and sheer malice -- are a virtual checklist of modern culture.Potter, a onetime writer for the BBC, styled his writing as the research findings of the nonexistent Lifemanship Correspondence College, on topics like ''How to Make People Feel Awkward.'' ''Lifemanship'' offers laboratory-tested techniques for excelling in cocktail party talk, no matter how uninformed you are. One tactic is ''languaging up,'' which Potter defines as ''to confuse, irritate and depress by the use of foreign words, fictitious or otherwise.''''Lifemanship'' guides the reader through the important social milieus of an upper-class Briton of the middle 20th century. Its section on ''Week-endmanship'' offers strategies for outshining the other guests at a country house, while sloughing off as much as possible. One ploy is to ostentatiously clear the table on Friday night and wash a few dishes -- which, if done right, can ensure that you are not expected to lift a finger for the rest of the visit.When a Lifeman is called on to write a book review on a subject he knows little about, the key is pretending to know more than the author. Potter recommends comments like, ''I am surprised that Mr. Sprott does not give more credit, in the main body of his text, to that fine teacher and impeccable scholar Dr. Kalamesa of Joinstown.'' This is ''considered quite fair,'' Potter says, ''even if you have never seen the name of Kalamesa before, which of course you never will have, except in some footnote or appendix to Sprott's book.''Potter began his series in 1947 with ''Gamesmanship,'' a word the Oxford English Dictionary credits him with coining. In that book, he made clear that appearing to win is at least as important as winning. But he also had advice for how to -- as the O.E.D. defines the word he made up -- win ''by means that barely qualify as legitimate.'' One strategy is ''limpmanship,'' which includes both the use of a minor injury to win difficult contests and, conversely, adapting a game when your opponent is injured in a way that, although apparently favoring your opponent's injury, ''will yet benefit you in the end.''Potter reached his creative zenith with ''One-Upmanship,'' which extended ''upmanship'' principles to everyday life. He offered shrewd advice for the would-be wine connoisseur. ''A good general rule,'' he says, ''is to state that the bouquet is better than the taste, and vice versa.'' When giving gifts, a main goal, he notes, is ''to make the receiver feel there is some implied criticism.'' For the middle-aged man who will not admit he needs glasses, he suggests a glasses case. Children can be tortured by giving them presents a year or two below their age group.The humor of Potter's books is rooted in the British obsession with decorum, and reluctance to confront awkward truths. In a culture where such a premium is placed on keeping up appearances, there is particular sting to Potter's admonition that the ideal gift for a woman whose youth is fading is ''patent food which announces clearly on the front label that it has been specially treated to be made more easily digestible.''Beneath all the posing and the oblique put-downs, Potter's subject, gently approached though it is, is humiliation -- how to dish it out and how to avoid being its target. It is a topic that resonates strongly in America today. On television, we watch admiringly as Donald Trump, Simon Cowell and an unending parade of bachelors, bachelorettes and ''Survivor'' tribesmen eject losers from the charmed circle. We are addicted to shameful falls from grace, like Martha Stewart's and Michael Jackson's. And at social occasions, toasts are being replaced by ''roasts,'' an invitation to tell mean-spirited stories about the honoree.A half-century ago, Potter had an uncanny sense that modern life was headed in this direction. He was, of course, a parodist. It seems clear, in the end, that the real targets of his barbs are not the people who are one-upped, but would-be Lifemen and Gamesmen who feel the need to outdo each other so assiduously. What is undeniable, though, is that Potter's books are clever, and they make better gifts than a diet book or a bottle of mouthwash.Editorial ObserverNot since the 1960's, when federal judges in the South were threatened by cross burnings and firebombs, have judges been so besieged. Senator John Cornyn, Republican of Texas, set off a furor when he said judges could be inviting physical attacks with controversial decisions. And last week the House majority leader, Tom DeLay, called for an investigation of the federal judges in the Terri Schiavo case, saying ominously: ''We set up the courts. We can unset the courts.''Conservatives claim that they are rising up against ''activist judges,'' who decide cases based on their personal beliefs rather than the law. They frequently point to Justice Antonin Scalia as a model of honest, ''strict constructionist'' judging. And Justice Scalia has eagerly embraced the hero's role. Last month, after the Supreme Court struck down the death penalty for those under 18, he lashed out at his colleagues for using the idea of a ''living Constitution'' that evolves over time to hand down political decisions -- something he says he would never do.The idea that liberal judges are advocates and partisans while judges like Justice Scalia are not is being touted everywhere these days, and it is pure myth. Justice Scalia has been more than willing to ignore the Constitution's plain language, and he has a knack for coming out on the conservative side in cases with an ideological bent. The conservative partisans leading the war on activist judges are just as inconsistent: they like judicial activism just fine when it advances their own agendas.Justice Scalia's views on federalism -- which now generally command a majority on the Supreme Court -- are perhaps the clearest example of the problem with the conservative attack on judicial activism. When conservatives complain about activist judges, they talk about gay marriage and defendants' rights. But they do not mention the 11th Amendment, which has been twisted beyond its own plain words into a states' rights weapon to throw minorities, women and the disabled out of federal court.The 11th Amendment says federal courts cannot hear lawsuits against a state brought by ''Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State.'' But it's been interpreted to block suits by a state's own citizens -- something it clearly does not say. How to get around the Constitution's express words? In a 1991 decision, Justice Scalia wrote that ''despite the narrowness of its terms,'' the 11th Amendment has been understood by the court ''to stand not so much for what it says, but for the presupposition of our constitutional structure which it confirms.'' If another judge used that rationale to find rights in the Constitution, Justice Scalia's reaction would be withering. He went on, in that 1991 decision, to throw out a suit by Indian tribes who said they had been cheated by the State of Alaska.Conservative politicians insist that courts should defer to the democratically elected branches, but conservative judges do not seem to be listening. The Supreme Court's conservative majority regularly overturns laws passed by Congress, like the Violence Against Women Act and the Gun-Free School Zones Act. The court has even established a bizarre series of hoops Congress must jump through to pass a law protecting Americans' 14th Amendment equal-protection rights. Congress must prove in many cases that the law it passed is ''congruent'' and ''proportional'' to the harm being addressed. Even John Noonan Jr., an appeals court judge appointed by President Reagan, has said these new rules -- which Justice Scalia eagerly embraces -- reduce Congress to the level of an ''administrative agency.''Justice Scalia likes to boast that he follows his strict-constructionist philosophy wherever it leads, even if it leads to results he disagrees with. But it is uncanny how often it leads him just where he already wanted to go. In his view, the 14th Amendment prohibits Michigan from using affirmative action in college admissions, but lets Texas make gay sex a crime. (The Supreme Court has held just the opposite.) He is dismissive when inmates invoke the Eighth Amendment ban on cruel and unusual punishment to challenge prison conditions. But he is supportive when wealthy people try to expand the ''takings clause'' to block the government from regulating their property.The inconsistency of the conservative war on judges was apparent in the Terri Schiavo ordeal. Mr. DeLay, an outspoken critic of activist courts, does not want to investigate the federal trial judge and the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit for judicial activism, but for the opposite: for refusing to overturn the Florida state courts' legal decisions, and Michael Schiavo's decisions about his wife's medical care.The classic example of conservative inconsistency remains Bush v. Gore. Not only did the court's conservative bloc trample on the Florida state courts and stop the vote counting -- it declared its ruling would not be a precedent for future cases. How does Justice Scalia explain that decision? In a recent New Yorker profile, he is quoted as saying, with startling candor, that ''the only issue was whether we should put an end to it, after three weeks of looking like a fool in the eyes of the world.'' That, of course, isn't a constitutional argument -- it is an unapologetic defense of judicial activism.When it comes to judicial activism, conservative judges are no better than liberal ones -- and, it must be said, no worse. If conservatives are going to continue their war on the judiciary, though, they should be honest. They do not want to get rid of judicial activists, a standard that would bring down even Justice Scalia. They want to rid the courts of judges who disagree with them.Editorial ObserverBloggers like to demonize the MSM (that's Mainstream Media), but it is increasingly hard to think of the largest news blogs as being outside the mainstream. Bloggers have been showing up at national political conventions, at the World Economic Forum at Davos and on the cover of Business Week. Establishment warhorses like Arthur Schlesinger Jr. are signing on to write for Arianna Huffington's blog collective. And Garrett Graff, of FishbowlDC, broke through the cyberceiling recently and acquired the ultimate inside-the-Beltway media credential: a White House press pass.Bloggers are not only getting access; they have also been getting results. The Drudge Report, of course, is famous for pushing stories, often with a rightward spin, onto the national media agenda, but it is not alone. Daily Kos did a brilliant job last fall of pressuring Sinclair Broadcasting not to show a hatchet-job documentary about John Kerry. And Joshua Micah Marshall has been rattling Congress with his entertaining and influential listing of where individual members stand on Social Security privatization. Blogs helped to shape, in some cases in major ways, some of the biggest stories of the last year -- the presidential election, tsunami relief, Dan Rather.The thing about influence is that, as bloggers well know, it is only a matter of time before people start trying to hold you accountable. Bloggers are so used to thinking of themselves as outsiders, and watchdogs of the LSM (that's Lame Stream Media), that many have given little thought to what ethical rules should apply in their online world. Some insist that they do not need journalistic ethics because they are not journalists, but rather activists, or humorists, or something else entirely. But more bloggers, and blog readers, are starting to ask whether at least the most prominent blogs with the highest traffic shouldn't hold themselves to the same high standards to which they hold other media.Every mainstream news organization has its own sets of ethics rules, but all of them agree broadly on what constitutes ethical journalism. Information should be verified before it is printed, and people who are involved in a story should be given a chance to air their viewpoints, especially if they are under attack. Reporters should avoid conflicts of interest, even significant appearances of conflicts, and disclose any significant ones. Often, a conflict means being disqualified to cover a story or a subject. When errors are discovered or pointed out by internal or external sources, they must be corrected. And there should be a clear wall between editorial content and advertising.Bloggers often invoke these journalistic standards in criticizing the MSM, and insist on harsh punishment when they are violated. The blogs that demanded Dan Rather's ouster accused him of old-school offenses: not sufficiently checking the facts about President Bush's National Guard service, refusing to admit and correct errors, and having undisclosed political views that shaded the journalism. Eason Jordan, CNN's chief news executive, resigned this year after a blogmob attacked him for a reported statement at the World Economic Forum at Davos that the military had aimed at journalists in Iraq and killed 12 of them. Their complaint was even more basic than in Mr. Rather's case: they were upset that Mr. Jordan said something they believed to be untrue.But Mr. Rather's and Mr. Jordan's misdeeds would most likely not have landed them in trouble in the world of bloggers, where few rules apply. Many bloggers make little effort to check their information, and think nothing of posting a personal attack without calling the target first -- or calling the target at all. They rarely have procedures for running a correction. The wall between their editorial content and advertising is often nonexistent. (Wonkette, a witty and well-read Washington blog, posts a weekly shout-out inside its editorial text to its advertisers, including partisan ones like Democrats.org.) And bloggers rarely disclose whether they are receiving money from the people or causes they write about.A few bloggers have begun calling for change. There have even been fledgling attempts to create ethical guidelines, like the ones found at Cyberjournalist.net. Defenders of the status quo argue that ethics rules are not necessary in the blogosphere because truth emerges through ''collaboration,'' and that bias and conflicts of interest are rooted out by ''transparency.'' But ''collaboration'' is a haphazard way of defending against dishonesty and slander, and blogs are actually not all that transparent. MSM journalists write under their own names. Someone would be likely to notice if a newspaper reporter covering a campaign was also on the campaign's staff. But it is hard to know who many bloggers are, and whether they are paid to take the positions they are espousing.Richard Hofstadter noted in ''The Age of Reform'' that American reformers had been prone to an ''enormous amount of self-accusation.'' Throughout history, reform movements have ostentatiously held themselves to higher standards than the institutions they attacked. The political reformers who took on Tammany Hall declared that they would not accept patronage jobs. Members of the Woman's Christian Temperance Union took a Temperance Pledge.Many bloggers who criticize the MSM's ethics, however, are in the anomalous position of holding themselves to lower standards, or no standards at all. That may well change. Ana Marie Cox, who edits Wonkette, notes that blogs are still ''a very young medium,'' and that ''things have yet to be worked out.'' Before long, leading blogs could have ethics guidelines and prominently posted corrections policies.Bloggers may need to institutionalize ethics policies to avoid charges of hypocrisy. But the real reason for an ethical upgrade is that it is the right way to do journalism, online or offline. As blogs grow in readers and influence, bloggers should realize that if they want to reform the American media, that is going to have to include reforming themselves.  Editorial ObserverIt is no surprise, given the close ties between industry and regulators in Washington these days, that Joe Barton is chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee. Mr. Barton, a Texas Republican, is such an energy industry loyalist -- and so soft on air pollution -- that his hometown paper dubbed him ''Smokey Joe.'' He has regularly helped his industry friends by weakening environmental laws and handing out tax breaks. But now he seems poised to do something far more disturbing: block legislation to secure chemical plants against terrorist attacks.Chemical plants are probably the nation's greatest vulnerability. President Bush's former deputy homeland security adviser, Richard Falkenrath, told Congress last month that they stand ''alone as uniquely deadly, pervasive and susceptible to terrorist attack.'' The death toll from a chemical plant attack could easily outstrip 9/11. The Department of Homeland Security has warned that a single chlorine tank explosion could kill 17,500 people.Two of the country's most dangerous chemical facilities, which threaten more than one million people, are in Dallas, just outside Mr. Barton's district. There is also toxic waste being transported through his district on rail lines and highways. Mr. Barton's committee chairmanship is likely to give him an enormous say in whether chemical plant security legislation passes this year.That decision pits the interests of his energy industry supporters against the well-being of his constituents who live or work inside the kill zone. Unfortunately, so far Mr. Barton has tilted in favor of industry.If corporations were allowed to pick congressmen, Mr. Barton is probably just the one the chemical industry would choose. Before his election, he was a consultant for Atlantic Richfield Oil and Gas Company, and he has accepted more than $1.8 million in campaign contributions from the energy and chemical industries. In Congress, his causes have been an energy and chemical industry wish list. He has fought to weaken air quality standards that apply to Ellis County, Texas, his home county, which has three enormous cement plants that spew large amounts of toxins. And he has pushed to exempt makers of MTBE, a fuel additive that has spilled into bodies of water across the country, from paying to clean it up.Even for congressmen used to giving the energy and chemical industries what they want, chemical plant security is a sensitive subject. Individual members are often reluctant to take a public stand against strengthening security, for fear of appearing soft on terrorism or because they do not want to be blamed if there is a successful attack. Senator Jon Corzine's chemical plant bill was unanimously voted out of committee, where senators had to record their votes, but then was quietly blocked when it got to the Senate floor.Mr. Barton, however, is one of the few congressmen who have spoken out publicly against chemical plant security legislation. In 2003, when there was a serious push to pass a bill, he said he did not see a need for a tough new law. ''If there are enough terrorists who are dedicated enough and equipped well enough,'' he told The National Journal, ''they're going to overwhelm everything that you put up short of some sort of Fort Knox -- which doesn't make much sense, given the cost and the relatively remote possibility that any specific site is going to be targeted.''The notion that unless chemical plants are as secure as Fort Knox they do not need any security at all is ridiculous. The unfortunate truth is that chemical facilities, including the most dangerous, are so unprotected that they are vulnerable to attack not just by Al Qaeda, but also by much smaller and less sophisticated groups who might be deterred by armed guards and concrete barriers.I recently visited two plants near Mr. Barton's district, both of which were on the list of the 123 most potentially deadly facilities in the country, and found what appeared to be shocking vulnerability.At Petra Chemicals, which has large amounts of deadly chlorine on hand, there was a no trespassing sign, but security on the perimeter was minimal. An environmental expert and I parked outside and walked around for more than a half-hour without being stopped. We had no problem walking up to a large railroad car just outside the plant that had a skull and crossbones, and markings indicating that it held up to 90 tons of chlorine. At Harcros Chemicals, another chlorine facility, the fencing was somewhat better. But again, we saw no guards, and no one stopped us when we parked and walked along the plant perimeter, looking as suspicious as we could.In his much-cited book ''What's the Matter With Kansas?,'' Thomas Frank laments that conservatives have succeeded in getting red-state voters to vote against their own interests on important issues. The Republican Congressional leadership's opposition to a serious chemical plant security bill could test the limits of this phenomenon. If Mr. Barton -- or Senator James Inhofe, the Oklahoma Republican who is leading the fight in the Senate -- sides with industry against his own constituents on averting a Sept. 11 in their own backyard, he could hand his opponents an issue that resonates powerfully with ordinary voters.That is the narrowly self-interested reason why Mr. Barton, and every other member of Congress, should want to get a strong chemical plant bill through Congress this year. But there is also the test by which all homeland security initiatives should be measured: whether, if there were another terrorist attack, they would feel they had done everything they should have to keep Americans safe.Editorial Observer''Congress is composed of 535 individuals. Two hundred and eighty-eight are lawyers. And you wonder what's wrong in Congress?'' That was just the start of Hal Phillip Walker's angry screed against the legal profession, which he also blamed for the national anthem. ''Nobody knows the words. Nobody can sing it. Nobody understands it. suppose all of the lawyers supported it, because a lawyer wrote the words and a judge wrote the tune.''Mr. Walker, the rage-fueled presidential candidate of the Replacement Party -- who also rails against corporations, the tax system and crop subsidies -- is the brooding omnipresence hanging over Robert Altman's classic film ''Nashville.'' The movie is many things: a poignant story of the intersecting lives of a group of lost souls, a wry exploration of the world of country music and -- as Mr. Altman said on its release -- an acerbic commentary on a particularly American version of success.''Nashville'' -- which was released 30 years ago this month -- is also, perhaps most of all, a powerful evocation of the most cynical era in modern American history. In 1975 the nation was still reeling from the Vietnam War, and its faith in institutions had been shattered by Watergate. Watching ''Nashville'' three decades later, there is an unsettling shock of recognition, because the government's current policies seem to be hurtling us to another time of deep national disillusionment.Nashville's great strength, and its enduring charm, is its ensemble of colorful and compelling characters. Ronee Blakley gives a remarkable performance as Barbara Jean, the reigning country music queen, who is losing grip of her sanity; Karen Black is Connie White, her archrival. Lily Tomlin, in the role of a lifetime, plays Linnea Reese, a mother of two deaf children, who sings in an African-American church choir, and is tempted to cheat on her husband with a visiting rock star. Henry Gibson is Haven Hamilton, the reigning country king, and Keith Carradine is Tom Frank, the rock star-lothario.These characters, and quite a few more, are adrift in a world of confusion, betrayal and unexpected violence. This may be the Bible Belt, but the movie makes painfully clear there is nothing in Nashville for the characters to put their faith in. The city's dominant ethic is success, but as Barbara Jean cracks up -- and has to be led offstage after clucking like a chicken -- it is obvious just how empty that can be.Love has little more to recommend it. On a brief visit, Tom manages to seduce four women, two of them married. He turns out to have a disconcerting habit of calling the next woman he wants to sleep with while the last one is still in the room. In a particularly biting scene, he has all four women attend a nightclub performance in which he sings ''I'm Easy'' -- his heartfelt protestation that he ''never cared too much for games'' -- in a way that makes each woman think he is singing only to her.The characters are churchgoers, but the movie makes the point that religion cannot save them. In a brilliant montage, it cuts from one Sunday service to another and shows how families are divided, not brought together: Linnea is singing in her African-American church while her family is worshipping in a white one; Haven is praying at a Protestant church, while his wife is at a Catholic one. Barbara Jean is alone on a stage in another church, sitting in a wheelchair, singing a mournful hymn in a slightly unhinged manner.The news media are the most useless of all. The movie skewers journalists, and self-proclaimed deep thinkers, through Opal, played by Geraldine Chaplin, a BBC documentary maker with an unerring ability to misconstrue everything. Her moral compass is also wildly off: when Linnea says that her children are deaf, Opal exclaims, ''Oh my God, how awful,'' and insists it would be too depressing for her to meet them.Nashville opens with Hal Phillip Walker's sound truck wending its way through the city, and ends at a Walker rally. The truck shows up repeatedly, broadcasting the candidate's hostile recitation of his political platform, and providing a running theme of populist discontent. His platform is an amalgam of ''anti-'' positions: in keeping with the country's dark mood, he has little to say about what he is for.The year 1975, with the double hits of Watergate and Vietnam, was a unique moment. But we appear to be headed toward a similar national crisis of faith. The Iraq war was started on a false premise, and the deceptions continue to pile up. The Bush administration insists that it is winning, and that it has a strategy for victory, despite all evidence to the contrary. At home, it has turned a budget surplus into a dangerously large deficit, and still wants to make its first-term tax cuts permanent, which could cost $2 trillion.The upside of despair is that it can be a powerful agent for change. The year after ''Nashville'' came out, Tennessee punished the Republicans -- and Gerald Ford, who pardoned Nixon -- by helping to elect a Democratic president, and sending a Democrat to the Senate. It was following Hal Philip Walker's angry coda: ''If there's any cleaning up done, we're going to have to do it. The Lord is not going to do the replacing, and the powers that be are certainly not going to replace themselves.''Editorial ObserverThe wall of separation between church and state is in real danger of falling now that Sandra Day O'Connor is retiring. The Supreme Court narrowly reaffirmed its commitment to that wall last week in its Ten Commandments rulings, but only because Justice O'Connor voted to maintain that wall. If her replacement votes the other way, there may soon be more crosses, Ten Commandments monuments and prayers on government property.There is a growing debate about what impact that would have on American life. That debate subtly found its way into last week's decisions. The justices generally focus more on what they think the Constitution means than on how their decisions are likely to be received. But two of last week's opinions made oblique reference to the rise of the religious right and its increasing anger over the court's religion rulings.Justice Stephen Breyer, who was a key swing vote, suggested -- in an argument that may be gaining strength nationwide -- that being less strict about the separation of church and state might appease religious activists and reduce the nation's religious tensions. But Justice David Souter made the more compelling argument that the nation's growing religious divisions only underscore the need for the government to remain neutral in religious matters.The Ten Commandments cases were decided against a backdrop of extraordinary attacks from religious activists. Shortly after the cases were argued, they staged ''Justice Sunday,'' a rally addressed by the Senate majority leader that was beamed to hundreds of churches across the country. Speaker after speaker denounced the judiciary. On his radio show, James Dobson, head of Focus on the Family, has compared the ''black-robed men'' on the Supreme Court to the ''men in white robes'' of the Ku Klux Klan.It appears, from last week's decisions, that this heated rhetoric may have had an effect on the court. The swing vote in the two cases was Justice Breyer, who usually sides with the court's four-member liberal bloc. In one case, he joined with the liberals -- and Justice O'Connor -- to strike down Ten Commandments displays on the walls of county courthouses in Kentucky. But in the other, he joined conservatives in upholding a Ten Commandments monument on the grounds of the Texas State Capitol.Justice Breyer felt that because there were so many displays like the Texas monument around the country, ordering it removed could ''encourage disputes'' and ''create the very kind of religiously based divisiveness that the Establishment Clause seeks to avoid.'' But it is not clear that as a practical matter, allowing more religious displays would reduce religious tensions.In fact, Justice Souter, writing for the majority in the Kentucky case, argued just the opposite. Although America is ''centuries away from the St. Bartholomew's Day massacre,'' he wrote, ''the divisiveness of religion in current life is inescapable.'' Given that, Justice Souter warned, ''this is no time to deny the prudence of understanding the Establishment Clause to require the government to stay neutral on religious belief.''It would be a mistake to make too much of Justice Breyer's brief comment about keeping the religious peace, especially since he also signed on to Justice Souter's opinion, which took the opposite position. But the argument has been made in other places, too. In his new book, ''Divided by God,'' Noah Feldman, a prominent New York University law professor, uses similar reasoning to argue that the courts should ''loosen up on religious talk and symbols.''There is undeniably a need for more common ground between conservative Christians and the rest of the country. But injecting more religion in public life is the wrong way to go about achieving it. If government forums are opened to religious expression, we can look forward to bitter fights about what kind to permit. The City Council in Boise, Idaho, hardly a hotbed of secularism, voted to move a Ten Commandments monument off city property a while back after a right-wing minister insisted on his right to put up his own religious monument -- one denouncing homosexuality and saying that Matthew Shepard, the slain gay Wyoming college student, was in hell.Opening up government forums to religion would almost inevitably prompt more fighting over exactly which religion gets to participate. A narrow view of which religion should be intertwined with government was on display last month in Guilford County, N.C., where the presiding judge ruled that Muslim witnesses cannot take their oaths on the Koran. If that were allowed, he said, someone who worshiped brick walls might want to swear on a brick.When Justice O'Connor's successor joins the court, the church-state wall is very likely to weaken. If Justice Breyer is right, yielding ground to religious advocates could reduce ''religiously based divisiveness.'' But if Justice Souter is right, it would only make things worse. The early response to last week's decisions was not encouraging. The day the rulings came down, the Christian Defense Coalition announced a campaign to place more Ten Commandments monuments in communities across the country. One community the group has taken aim at is Boise -- which all but guarantees there is plenty more divisiveness yet to come.Editorial ObserverCorrection:  July 13, 2005, Wednesday  An Editorial Observer column in The Times on July 4 misidentified the North Carolina official who said that if Muslim witnesses were allowed to swear on the Koran, someone who worshipped brick walls might want to swear on a brick. It was a spokesman for the state Administrative Office of the Courts, not a Guilford County judge.Yesterday's editorial on the federal student loan program misidentified Representative Thomas Petri. He is from Wisconsin, not Ohio.Charles Colson, the quintessential Watergate-era hatchet man, once declared that he would ''walk over my own grandmother'' to get Richard Nixon re-elected. He may not have committed the worst dirty tricks attributed to him, like plotting to firebomb the Brookings Institution to destroy a secret report on the Vietnam War that was damaging to his boss. But before the Nixon White House scandals were over, he was sent away to federal prison for obstruction of justice.In the midst of his travails, Mr. Colson found religion. After he finished his sentence, he started a prison ministry to bring inmates to Jesus. There is nothing particularly unusual about a conservative Republican gravitating to evangelical Christianity, though given his record, his critics were skeptical. (Harriet Van Horne, the liberal columnist, wrote that ''If he isn't embarrassed by this sudden excess of piety, then surely the Lord must be.'') What is remarkable, though, is the other role he took on: impassioned, even radical, prison reformer.There is a new biography out, ''Charles W. Colson: A Life Redeemed,'' by Jonathan Aitken, that explores Mr. Colson's strange odyssey. The early chapters recount his rise from surly frat boy to hard-drinking marine to amoral political operative. They are replete with alcohol binges and dirty tricks, including his carefully executed plan to make it appear that the McGovern campaign was insulting the president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. just as the union leader was mulling which presidential candidate to back.When he was released from prison after serving seven months of a one- to three-year sentence, Mr. Colson founded the Prison Fellowship, a ministry that works with local churches to spread Christianity among prison inmates. Later, he started a subsidiary, the Justice Fellowship, which lobbies to improve prison conditions, reform criminal sentencing and help prepare prisoners for eventual re-entry to society.Mr. Colson advocates ''restorative justice,'' an approach based not on punishing criminals, but on transforming them. It is partly conservative: the Prison Fellowship sees religious conversion as key, and seeks to erode the church-state wall in prisons. But much of the rest of its agenda is nearly indistinguishable from that of the American Civil Liberties Union. The Justice Fellowship opposes mandatory minimum sentences, and it supports expanded training and job opportunities behind bars, as well as more government spending to help newly released inmates.Prison reform has been a liberal cause since the Quakers founded the first penitentiary, Philadelphia's Walnut Street Jail, in 1790. Political conservatives have traditionally been more focused on punishing criminals than on reforming them, and religious conservatives have generally felt the same way. ''The evangelical church has some great strengths,'' Mr. Colson said in an interview, but historically, ''concern for the poor and the marginal was not one of them.''There are signs that, at least on the issue of prisons, that could be changing. In the last few years, evangelical Protestants and their allies in Congress have become more interested in prison reform, and Mr. Colson deserves much of the credit. In 2003, by a unanimous vote, Congress passed the Prison Rape Elimination Act, mandating an extensive study of the problem of rape in state and federal prisons. It was not as good, certainly, as a well-financed program to stop prison rape, but it was still a dramatic recognition of a problem that has long been hidden from view.In his 2004 State of the Union address, President Bush endorsed a $300 million program ''to expand job training and placement services, to provide transitional housing and to help newly released prisoners get mentoring.''There is a bill pending in Congress that would provide funds -- not nearly enough, but a start -- to help integrate the nearly 650,000 men and women released every year back into society. It would pay for demonstration projects to provide education, job training, housing assistance and other support to prisoners on their way out, many of whom now receive nothing more than a bus ticket and the clothes on their back. The bill is supported by some of the most liberal members of Congress, and some of the most conservative, and by groups ranging from George Soros's Open Society Institute to the Christian Coalition.It is tempting to attribute Mr. Colson's interest in prison reform to his own stint behind bars. If a conservative is a liberal who has been mugged, a prison reformer may just be a law-and-order conservative who has spent time in jail. Mr. Colson doesn't entirely disagree. ''What I experienced in seven months in prison,'' he said, ''was the total futility of that system.'' But he insists that his views about criminal justice are firmly rooted in his faith: ''The biblical model says the way you deal with offenders is to redeem them.''Editorial ObserverTwo of the media stars of the summer are a charming husband-and-wife team who made their last film appearance in 1947. Nick and Nora Charles, Dashiell Hammett's wealthy Depression-era detectives, are the hero and heroine of six ''Thin Man'' movies, which were released this month in a boxed set that quickly jumped to No. 1 on Amazon.com's list of best-selling DVD's.If it's surprising that 21st-century Americans find Nick and Nora so appealing, it's no more so than that Hammett, a dedicated socialist with a very dark worldview, created them in the first place.Hammett was an ex-Pinkerton detective who became a writer of pulp crime stories with unsentimental, sometimes unsympathetic, heroes. His Continental Op, an operative for the fictional Continental Detective Agency, was a sullen loner who was just a few moral notches above the criminals he was tracking down. ''It is a long step from Holmes pondering the significance of a flake of cigar ash,'' one critic has said, ''to Hammett's Op, who, on one occasion, stuffs a length of copper wire into his pocket because it's just the right length to go around somebody's neck.''Hammett's first full-length novel, ''Red Harvest,'' is a searing story set in a corrupt mining town called Personville and pronounced ''Poisonville'' by the locals. ''Poisonville is right,'' the Continental Op, who ends up engaging in a few bad acts himself, says bitterly. ''It's poisoned me.'' Dorothy Parker once called another Hammett detective, Sam Spade in ''The Maltese Falcon,'' ''so hard-boiled, you could roll him on the White House lawn.''But then the stock market crashed, and Hammett created Nick Charles, a happily married, semi-retired private eye who lives off his wife's money and cheerfully drinks his way through Manhattan high society.''The Thin Man'' announces itself right away as a very different kind of novel. It begins with Nick waiting for Nora to finish her Christmas shopping. When she does, she reports that Asta, the couple's spirited terrier, has ''had a swell afternoon -- knocked over a table of toys at Lord & Taylor's, [and] scared a fat woman silly by licking her leg in Saks's.'' Nick and Nora's lives revolve around their elegant apartment, swank parties and posh supper clubs.''The Thin Man'' was made into a classic movie, starring William Powell and Myrna Loy, which in turn produced five sequels. Despite their often uninspired, even convoluted, plots, the movies' witty dialogue, engaging acting and sophisticated ambience made them immensely popular. Their great charm lies in Nick and Nora's strikingly modern marriage of equals, and the genteel, carefree world they inhabit.Even if it is first-rate escapist entertainment, Hammett purists consider ''The Thin Man'' his weakest novel. It was certainly a moral compromise for a man who identified strongly with the downtrodden and would eventually be jailed during the McCarthy era.He had exposed the rough working of capitalism in ''Red Harvest'' in early 1929, when the economy was still giddy. He could not have helped but be troubled by how much worse things were in 1934, when the unemployment rate was more than 20 percent. Yet that was the time when he was creating his most upbeat, upscale characters.There are at least two competing explanations for the new direction Hammett took in ''The Thin Man.'' One is that he was inspired by Lillian Hellman, the playwright with whom he was to have a lifelong, often tortured relationship.Hellman said that Hammett told her she was the model for Nora -- although he also told her, she said, that she was ''the silly girl in the book and the villainess.''Perhaps a better explanation is that Hammett knew that in hard times, when people opened a popular magazine or a novel, they wanted to read about penthouses, not breadlines. If they would pay to do so, Hammett was more than willing to oblige.That may be the reason Nick and Nora are popular again. Leaving the world's grittiness behind to wallow in a life of luxury is a fantasy that is particularly prevalent right now. On a new television show on VH1, ''Kept,'' young men are competing to be the kept man of a wealthy woman. On another, NBC's ''I Want to Be a Hilton,'' young people are vying to be part of a family of rich celebrities.We are not in a Great Depression. But with the economy feeling precarious, the war in Iraq going badly and the headlines filled with London subway bombers and North Korean nuclear weapons, it is comforting for many people to imagine that a rich person might want to take care of them -- or that they are rich themselves, with little more to worry about than how to get over a martini-induced hangover.Editorial ObserverThere could be a lot of talk about toads at the confirmation hearings for John Roberts Jr. In one of the few revealing opinions he has written in his brief time on the bench, Judge Roberts voted to reconsider a ruling that said the Endangered Species Act protected the arroyo Southwestern toad from being wiped out by a real estate development. He strongly suggested that Congress could protect only a species whose demise would affect ''interstate commerce'' -- but that toad, he wrote, is a ''hapless toad that, for reasons of its own, lives its entire life in California.''Judge Roberts's opinion, with its wry reference to the possibility that an entire species could be destroyed, disturbed environmentalists. But its implications go far beyond the environment. It suggests that Judge Roberts -- who broke with even a majority of the conservative judges on his court -- may hold extreme states' rights views, the kind that could sharply limit Congress's power to protect ordinary Americans from discrimination, pollution and unsafe workplaces. Much of the early discussion of Judge Roberts has focused on whether he would vote to overturn Roe v. Wade, but his views on federal power could be the sleeper issue.There is a misconception that so-called activist judges who ''legislate from the bench'' are invariably liberal. In fact, conservative judges can be even more eager to overrule decisions made by elected officials. In the toad case, Judge Roberts suggested that he was prepared to set aside by judicial fiat a decision of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, part of the executive branch, on applying a law passed by Congress.Liberal judges are often accused of reading too much into the equal-protection and due-process clauses, but conservatives have their own favorite parts of the Constitution.The Supreme Court's conservative majority used a very narrow interpretation of the commerce clause to strike down the Gun-Free School Zones Act and parts of the Violence Against Women Act and the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act -- all passed by the people's democratically elected representatives. And it used an overly broad reading of the 11th Amendment to weaken the Americans with Disabilities Act, holding that an Alabama nursing supervisor could not sue a state hospital for damages after it had fired her because she had breast cancer.Despite all of the attacks on liberal activist judges, conservative judges are arguably even more activist. In a recent Times Op-Ed piece, Paul Gewirtz, a Yale Law School professor, and Chad Golder reported that the justice who had voted most often to overturn laws passed by Congress, a reasonable measure of judicial activism, was Clarence Thomas, the court's most conservative member (he did so 65.63 percent of the time). The justices least likely to do that were President Clinton's two appointees, Ruth Bader Ginsburg and Stephen Breyer.John Noonan Jr., a federal judge appointed by President Reagan, warned in his book ''Narrowing the Nation's Power'' that conservatives' judicial activism was running amok. He argued that it lacked a legitimate constitutional basis, and pointed to several eras in American history when it had done great harm. In a series of cases starting with Lochner v. New York in 1905, the Supreme Court struck down important protections for workers, including workplace safety standards and maximum-hours and minimum-wage laws. In the notorious Dred Scott decision, a conservative Supreme Court held that Congress did not have the power to keep slaves from being brought into a federal territory -- and helped start the Civil War.Judge Roberts's toad opinion is the clearest indication yet of his tendencies toward judicial activism, but it is not the only one. As a Reagan administration lawyer, he wrote memos on the Voting Rights Act that indicated a hostility to federal intervention in state and local elections. He apparently was a member of a steering committee of the Federalist Society, a conservative legal group associated with the movement to scale back federal power.Having one more justice who supports weakening Congress could make an enormous difference. Last year, Sandra Day O'Connor, whose place Judge Roberts would take, cast the deciding vote to allow a man in a wheelchair to sue under the Americans with Disabilities Act after he was forced to crawl up the steps of a county courthouse. Four justices insisted that his suit was barred by the 11th Amendment, a modest limitation on the power of federal courts that conservatives have distorted into a sweeping ''sovereign immunity'' shield for states.Justice O'Connor was also the deciding vote in a case last year that rejected federalism-based objections to enforcing the Clean Air Act. If Judge Roberts votes with the most conservative justices, the court could start to revive the spirit of the Lochner era, gutting a wide array of laws that protect Americans from harm.The question of whether Judge Roberts would try to take power away from Congress is, no surprise, of great interest to the members of Congress. Arlen Specter, the Pennsylvania Republican who is chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, has said he intends to press the nominee about the commerce clause and federal power. So have several Democratic senators.Members of Congress, and ordinary Americans, should listen carefully to how Judge Roberts responds. Conservatives have long complained that activist liberal judges interpret the Constitution to ''create'' rights, like the right to privacy. But there are a growing number of activist conservative judges who are intent on using new readings of the Constitution to take away rights. Of the two varieties of activist judges, that is by far the more dangerous kind.Editorial ObserverOver Labor Day weekend 10 years ago, a programmer named Pierre Omidyar took a chance on an odd little Web site called AuctionWeb. Most of Silicon Valley spent the summer of 1995 dreaming up ways to use a newfangled technology called the Internet. This was his: an auction site that let anyone list an item or place a bid. He wrote the code in his spare bedroom and posted it on his personal home page, which had a whimsical domain name: www.ebay.com.Mr. Omidyar wanted to create a perfect market, something economists had only imagined, where everything sold for its ideal price. He was also a populist. It looked to Mr. Omidyar, who had a ponytail and wore Birkenstocks, as if the freewheeling Internet was being taken over by well-financed dot-coms. He wanted to ''give the individual the power to be a producer as well as a consumer.''Everyone told him that strangers wouldn't trade online with strangers, particularly in a format as unwieldy as an auction. But first the techies came, buying and selling computer parts. Then the collectors came -- at one point, more than 6 percent of all sales were for Beanie Babies. Then everyone came. EBay, with 64 million active users, is on track to sell more than $40 billion in goods this year.I interviewed Mr. Omidyar a few years ago when I was writing ''The Perfect Store: Inside eBay,'' and he waxed nostalgic about the early days, when eBay was a true community. Users chatted endlessly on its message boards, and when they had problems they sent e-mail to Pierre@ebay.com. One of the greatest innovations was the Feedback Forum. Buyers and sellers rated each other after a transaction, and the ratings were compiled and placed after users' names. EBay became a virtual small town, where people were known by their reputations.Mr. Omidyar eventually took eBay public, which meant investment bankers and feverish growth. It's a lot bigger and more commercial today, but elements of the founding vision clearly remain. EBay is still egalitarian: mom and pops and corporations are largely treated the same. The Feedback Forum is still going strong. And then there is the famous multicolored eBay logo: it was intended, its designer told me, to evoke a 60's sensibility -- to have ''a little bit of the ponytail about it.''EBay is a spectacular success, and not only because Mr. Omidyar is now worth $10 billion. It may not be a perfect market, but it has revolutionized pricing. The ''value'' of many things today is what they sell for on eBay. It has also given ordinary people an economic foothold online. Selling on eBay is the primary or secondary income for an estimated 724,000 Americans. EBay also did one thing Mr. Omidyar was not thinking about 10 years ago: it proved that even in these daunting times, one person with a good idea can still change the world.  ADAM COHENAPPRECIATIONSIn law school, I took a yearlong administrative law course from Stephen Breyer. Many people find ''ad law,'' the law of agencies and government regulation, fairly dull. But Justice Breyer, who was not yet on the Supreme Court, could barely contain his enthusiasm. He talked animatedly, week after week, about subjects like Congress's decision to mandate air bags in new cars. At the end of every class, we made a point of checking how much chalk there was on his suit, since he tended to back into the blackboard in his excitement over topics like ''agency nonacquiescence.''Early in his career, Justice Breyer was counsel to the Senate Judiciary Committee, where he worked on the federal criminal code, fair housing law and airline deregulation. Today, he is an unusual kind of judge: one with a deep personal attachment to the legislative process. That makes him a particularly interesting figure in the current debate over how ''activist'' judges should be.Justice Breyer has just published a book, ''Active Liberty: Interpreting Our Democratic Constitution,'' which is in part a response to those, like Justice Antonin Scalia, who believe the Constitution should be interpreted based on the ''original intent'' of the founders. But ''Active Liberty'' stands on its own as a provocative and well-argued case for reading the Constitution in light of the founders' greatest concern: giving the people the power to govern themselves.In this time of transition on the court, which is getting two new members, including a chief justice to succeed William Rehnquist, Justice Breyer's book could help chart a path in which the court starts to interpret the Constitution in ways that strengthen American democracy.''Active liberty,'' according to Justice Breyer, is the ability of ordinary citizens to play a role in government decisions. As he sees it, the Constitution's drafters were most interested in creating a government that remained under the control of, as the first three words of the document say, ''We the People.''Originalists like Justice Scalia see the Constitution as a set of rights and rules that were frozen in time when they were written. Justice Breyer argues that the better What-would-the-founders-do? approach is to interpret the Constitution in ways that promote its essential purpose: helping citizens get the knowledge and power they need to influence government policies on important issues.Justice Breyer applies the theory to specific cases. The right to free speech, he argues, should be interpreted in ways that help people exchange the information they need to govern themselves. Political speech is central to this process, and should be highly protected, he says, while ''commercial speech'' like advertising can be more regulated. He argues that campaign finance laws could survive many First Amendment challenges because they promote integrity in politics, which is a good thing for active liberty.Promoting active liberty does not mean allowing the majority to run roughshod over minorities. It calls for taking special care that all groups have a chance to fully participate in society and the political process. Discussing the recent University of Michigan affirmative action cases, Justice Breyer contrasts an opinion by Clarence Thomas, arguing that the Equal Protection Clause requires government actions to be ''colorblind,'' with one by Ruth Bader Ginsburg, more in the active liberty spirit, that sees a role for race-based distinctions intended to help groups ''long denied full citizenship.''There is a real need on the court for this kind of intellectual counterweight to Justice Scalia and his original intent theories. Justice Breyer is also providing a long-overdue response to politicians' bumper-sticker take on the courts: that conservative judges ''interpret'' the law, while liberal judges ''make'' it. (In reality, Justice Scalia has been one of the justices most willing to strike down Congressional statutes, while Justice Breyer has been the least willing.)Justice Breyer may also find some unexpected allies on the court. Justice Anthony Kennedy, a moderate conservative, has shown some inclination to think in active liberty terms, particularly in his rulings on gay rights and the juvenile death penalty. And at his confirmation hearings, John Roberts talked about the importance of deferring to the political branches, saying that ''a certain humility should characterize the judicial function.''In one of the book's most potent images, Justice Breyer argues that difficult public policy questions should be resolved through a great national conversation -- what Alexis de Tocqueville described as the ''tumult'' that ''you find yourself in the midst of'' when ''you descend on the soil of America.'' Through the Constitution, he says, the courts can help that conversation along. What we need more of, ''Active Liberty'' insists, is not activist judges, but activist citizens.In a recent episode of her ratings-blockbuster program, Judge Judy appeared to be resolving a son's financial dispute with his father. But what she was really doing, as only she can, was making the case for what a worthless piece of humanity the son was. She got the young man to admit that he had been arrested 13 times and convicted 4 times -- and told him sharply that she herself had five children, ''no convictions!'' The case concluded not with a lesson on the laws of interfamilial borrowing, but with the father looking into the camera and expressing Judge Judy's real verdict: ''He's a punk, and he'll always be a punk.''Judge Judy, also known as Judge Judith Sheindlin, is celebrating her 10th year on television, and she has never been more popular. She has one of the top programs in syndication, earning her a reported $30 million a year. Her books, with titles like ''Don't Pee on My Leg and Tell Me It's Raining,'' and ''Beauty Fades, Dumb Is Forever,'' have been best sellers. And she has some serious fans. This summer, both the novelist Kurt Vonnegut and the Washington Post columnist Richard Cohen made semiserious suggestions that she should be considered to fill Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's seat on the Supreme Court.''Judge Judy'' seems like a caricature of judging, more concerned with putting litigants in their place than with weighing evidence and legal doctrine. But many legal sociologists would argue that putting people in their place -- or exerting ''social control'' -- is to some degree what law is all about. Few real-life judges refer to litigants, as Judge Judy does, as ''you idiot,'' inform them bluntly ''there is something wrong with you,'' or end a legal proceeding by telling one of the parties that it would be a bad idea for her to have children. But the reason Judge Judy's show resonates so strongly is that she has an uncanny ability to act out justice-as-social-control in its rawest form.It has been widely accepted, as early as the legal realism movement of the 1920's, that law is about a lot more than just the neutral application of rules to facts. In an influential 1976 book, ''The Behavior of Law,'' Donald Black, a University of Virginia social sciences professor, argued that much of what occurs in the legal system can be explained by the relative social status of the participants. One of the universal truths he has observed is that law moves more easily down social hierarchies than up. It is far easier for a rich man to get a policeman to arrest a poor man in the street, for example, than the other way around.Professor Black also contends that certain kinds of people ''attract'' law to themselves. The poor, the culturally marginal and social deviants of all types are more likely to attract bad legal outcomes -- to be arrested, to be convicted, to lose civil lawsuits -- when they do the same things as more socially favored people. In a typical piece of Blackian fieldwork, researchers in the early 1970's sent two groups into a store to shoplift, some dressed as ''hippies,'' with long hair and dirty blue jeans, and others who looked more conventional. Not surprisingly, customers in the store turned the hippies in far more often than the ''straights,'' and with much more enthusiasm.In an interview, Professor Black could not recall having seen ''Judge Judy,'' which is a shame, since it is the perfect text for his theories. He has written that judges are at their most unforgiving when there is a large gap in social status between them and the parties who appear before them. Judge Judy is able to carry on the way she does because her litigants almost invariably have a multitude of low-status markers: they are unemployed, they have criminal records, they speak poorly. It would be a completely different show if the parties were wealthy. As things stand now, the lower a party's apparent status, the harsher Judge Judy is free to be. On a recent show, when a witness opened her mouth to reveal missing front teeth, it was all but inevitable that she would be yelled at to sit back down and say nothing.Since the French Revolution, Western society has been committed to the ideal that social status should not matter in court. The American legal system, perhaps more than any other, insists that all men and women are equal before the law, but legal sociologists can show that the reality is far different. In ''Sociological Justice,'' a book he wrote for a popular audience, Professor Black argues that the legal system would be fairer if efforts were made to hide information about the parties' social status from judges and juries. Judge Judy, of course, is an extreme example of the reverse; she is constantly asking about people's idleness and bad debts, and generally digging for what Professor Black calls the ''social geometry of the case.''It is hardly surprising that ''Judge Judy'' is so popular. People like to see social hierarchies reinforced, and people who violate social norms ''taught responsibility'' or otherwise punished. Humiliation is also a traditional crowd pleaser, and an important part of virtually every reality show on television. The real problem with ''Judge Judy'' is not that it is worse than most reality TV, which it is not. It is that for an audience that runs well into the millions every week, it is blurring the line between justice and social bullying.Editorial ObserverWhen Sandra Day O'Connor was nominated to the Supreme Court in 1981, she had more of a problem with the religious right than Harriet Miers. Anti-abortion forces didn't just suspect she was soft on abortion -- they had proof: her vote years earlier as an Arizona legislator to legalize it. Justice O'Connor even had an antagonist from back home in Phoenix, a member of the National Right to Life Committee who knew her socially and was dead set on keeping her off the court.During the confirmation process, Justice O'Connor -- then Judge O'Connor -- kept her all-American life story front and center: growing up on the Lazy B Ranch, making the law review at Stanford Law School, marrying a fellow editor, returning to Arizona to raise three sons.She prepared meticulously. ''She knew each senator's pet project,'' The Washington Post reported, ''and could congratulate them on network television for their 'fine work' in seeking solutions to the crime problem or the problem of caseload backlogs in the federal courts.''Jeremiah Denton, the fierce Alabama Republican and Vietnam War P.O.W. who had called abortion ''even more fundamental than the issue of slavery,'' was openly skeptical that Justice O'Connor could have forgotten, as she claimed, how she had voted on the abortion bill. But in the end, even he was won over.Justice O'Connor's skillful handling of the Senate -- which confirmed her 99 to 0 -- is an illuminating set piece in a fine new biography of Justice O'Connor by Joan Biskupic, who covers the Supreme Court for USA Today. Justice O'Connor is known mainly for the careful, moderate opinions that have put her at the center of a sharply divided court. But Ms. Biskupic's book is a reminder of just how political Justice O'Connor was before she got on the court and after, and why she will be so missed when she leaves.When President Reagan nominated her to be the first woman on the court, Justice O'Connor was a midlevel state court judge, but a shrewdly political one. As a state legislator, she had a large role in redrawing legislative district lines to favor her party. In the presidential bid of her fellow Arizonan Barry Goldwater, and Nixon's re-election campaign, she was a shrewd tactician. Nixon's Southwestern regional director recalled years later, ''Now here's a lady who understands phone banks.''Justice O'Connor was appointed to the Arizona Court of Appeals by Gov. Bruce Babbitt, a Democrat. Ms. Biskupic suggests that may have been because there was a good chance she would otherwise have run for governor, and won.Justice O'Connor has acted remarkably like a politician on the court. Ms. Biskupic recounts behind-the-scenes maneuvering, like Justice O'Connor's failed attempt to keep a majority together for the states' rights position in the 1985 case of Garcia v. San Antonio Metropolitan Transit Authority. But the most significant part of Justice O'Connor's story on the court is her careful parsing of contentious social issues, like abortion and affirmative action.If abortion opponents suspected she was a strong supporter of abortion rights, Justice Harry Blackmun, who wrote Roe v. Wade, was convinced that she wanted to overturn his beloved decision. But in a pivotal 1989 case, Webster v. Reproductive Health Services, Justice O'Connor proved both sides wrong, laying out her standard that abortion regulations should be upheld unless they imposed an ''undue burden'' on a woman's abortion decision. By supporting abortion rights but allowing limitations, Justice O'Connor ended up where most Americans are.On her first big affirmative action case, Wygant v. Jackson Board of Education, the justices split 4 to 4, and Justice O'Connor wanted to send the case back to the lower court for more fact-finding. She exasperated both camps with her search for middle ground: Justice Blackmun mimicked her to his law clerks, saying, ''I vote tentatively, very tentatively.'' In the end, she joined the conservatives in Wygant, ruling for white teachers who were laid off to protect the jobs of black teachers with less seniority, but she wrote separately to highlight when she believed affirmative action was acceptable.Later, in a pair of University of Michigan affirmative action cases, she split her vote, upholding the law school's plan, but striking down one at the college that came closer to racial quotas. Once again, she was roughly where polls show the Americans people are.There are disadvantages to Justice O'Connor's politician-like approach to the law. On some issues, it is important for the court to stand up to popular opinion and protect the rights of disfavored minorities. Politicians are also apt to be overly partisan. In Bush v. Gore, Justice O'Connor's Republican bent appeared to come to the fore, leading her to abandon her usual desire to find a middle ground, and to sign on without reservation to the conservatives' decision to stop counting votes in Florida. Ms. Biskupic faults Justice O'Connor for a lack of judicial boldness -- for her tendency to ''step to the brink, and then back away.''But in one of the most bitterly divided eras in American history, Justice O'Connor's political skills and moderate instincts have made her an important centripetal force, pulling the court's two blocs inward toward consensus. The big question now is whether the debacle of the Miers nomination will convince President Bush that it would be damaging, in these contentious times, to replace a swing justice with a far-right bomb-thrower. The court, and the nation, will benefit if Justice O'Connor's successor shares her interest in what unites the country rather than in what can divide it, and votes ''tentatively, very tentatively.''Editorial ObserverAt a North Carolina strangulation-murder trial this month, prosecutors announced an unusual piece of evidence: Google searches allegedly done by the defendant that included the words ''neck'' and ''snap.'' The data were taken from the defendant's computer, prosecutors say. But it might have come directly from Google, which -- unbeknownst to many users -- keeps records of every search on its site, in ways that can be traced back to individuals.Google is rolling out revolutionary new features at a blistering rate, most recently Google Base, which could evolve into a classified ad service, and the Google Book Search Library Project, which aims to put a vast number of books online. Google's stock recently soared past $400 a share, putting its market capitalization ahead of Time Warner and Gannett combined, and the personal fortunes of its founders, Sergey Brin and Larry Page, above $14 billion.Google is the subject of a new book, ''The Google Story,'' by David Vise and Mark Malseed, that tracks the company's rise from a student project at Stanford through its success in outmaneuvering Microsoft, Yahoo, AOL and other behemoths for Internet dominance. Google has long presented itself as the anti-Microsoft, a company that the digerati regard as a force for good in the technology world.In many ways, it has lived up to that reputation. But if it wants to hold on to its corporate halo, Google should do a better job of including users in decisions about how their personal information is collected, stored and shared.Google has succeeded so extraordinarily because its founders were able to see the future of the Internet more clearly than the rest of Silicon Valley. At a time when ''Web portals'' -- sites that directed users to online services -- were seen as the future, Mr. Brin and Mr. Page were convinced Internet searches would be pivotal. They developed technology that was far better than other search engines at sifting through the galaxy of information online. They slapped a typo of a name on their project -- a misspelling of ''googol,'' the number represented by a 1 followed by 100 zeroes -- got venture capital, and quickly built a company.Mr. Brin and Mr. Page believed companies should not be able to get better placement on the results page by paying money, something their competitors allowed. Google strictly separated out ''sponsored'' results, or ads, from search results, and gave up untold millions of dollars in revenue by keeping Google's home page ad free. The company has taken other idealistic positions over its short lifetime, including conducting its initial public offering by a ''Dutch auction,'' so Wall Street would not control it.Google operates according to two core principles. One is its mission ''to organize the world's information and make it universally accessible and useful.'' The other is its motto, ''Don't be evil,'' which Mr. Brin and Mr. Page take so seriously that they included it in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing. As Google grows and spreads into new areas, these two principles are turning out to be in tension. Google's book search, for example, aims to make books universally accessible in a way some authors regard as dismissive of their rights and illegal.The biggest area where Google's principles are likely to conflict is privacy. Google has been aggressive about collecting information about its users' activities online. It stores their search data, possibly forever, and puts ''cookies'' on their computers that make it possible to track those searches in a personally identifiable way -- cookies that do not expire until 2038. Its e-mail system, Gmail, scans the content of e-mail messages so relevant ads can be posted. Google's written privacy policy reserves the right to pool what it learns about users from their searches with what it learns from their e-mail messages, though Google says it won't do so. It also warns that users' personal information may be processed on computers located in other countries.The government can gain access to Google's data storehouse simply by presenting a valid warrant or subpoena. Under the Patriot Act, Google may not be able to tell users when it hands over their searches or e-mail messages. If the federal government announced plans to directly collect the sort of data Google does, there would be an uproar -- in fact there was in 2003, when the Pentagon announced its Total Information Awareness program, which was quickly shut down.In the early days of the Internet, privacy advocates argued that data should be collected on individuals only if they affirmatively agreed. But businesses like Google have largely succeeded in reversing the presumption. There is a privacy policy on the site, but many people don't read privacy policies. It is hard to believe most Google users know they have a cookie that expires in 2038, or have thought much about the government's ability to read their search history and stored e-mail messages without them knowing it.Google says it needs the data it keeps to improve its technology, but it is doubtful it needs so much personally identifiable information. Of course, this sort of data is enormously valuable for marketing. The whole idea of ''Don't be evil,'' though, is resisting lucrative business opportunities when they are wrong. Google should develop an overarching privacy theory that is as bold as its mission to make the world's information accessible -- one that can become a model for the online world. Google is not necessarily worse than other Internet companies when it comes to privacy. But it should be doing better.Editorial ObserverReligious conservatives have a cause this holiday season: the commercialization of Christmas. They're for it.The American Family Association is leading a boycott of Target for not using the words ''Merry Christmas'' in its advertising. (Target denies it has an anti-Merry-Christmas policy.) The Catholic League boycotted Wal-Mart in part over the way its Web site treated searches for ''Christmas.'' Bill O'Reilly, the Fox anchor who last year started a ''Christmas Under Siege'' campaign, has a chart on his Web site of stores that use the phrase ''Happy Holidays,'' along with a poll that asks, ''Will you shop at stores that do not say 'Merry Christmas'?''This campaign -- which is being hyped on Fox and conservative talk radio -- is an odd one. Christmas remains ubiquitous, and with its celebrators in control of the White House, Congress, the Supreme Court and every state supreme court and legislature, it hardly lacks for powerful supporters. There is also something perverse, when Christians are being jailed for discussing the Bible in Saudi Arabia and slaughtered in Sudan, about spending so much energy on stores that sell ''holiday trees.''What is less obvious, though, is that Christmas's self-proclaimed defenders are rewriting the holiday's history. They claim that the ''traditional'' American Christmas is under attack by what John Gibson, another Fox anchor, calls ''professional atheists'' and ''Christian haters.'' But America has a complicated history with Christmas, going back to the Puritans, who despised it. What the boycotters are doing is not defending America's Christmas traditions, but creating a new version of the holiday that fits a political agenda.The Puritans considered Christmas un-Christian, and hoped to keep it out of America. They could not find Dec. 25 in the Bible, their sole source of religious guidance, and insisted that the date derived from Saturnalia, the Roman heathens' wintertime celebration. On their first Dec. 25 in the New World, in 1620, the Puritans worked on building projects and ostentatiously ignored the holiday. From 1659 to 1681 Massachusetts went further, making celebrating Christmas ''by forbearing of labor, feasting or in any other way'' a crime.The concern that Christmas distracted from religious piety continued even after Puritanism waned. In 1827, an Episcopal bishop lamented that the Devil had stolen Christmas ''and converted it into a day of worldly festivity, shooting and swearing.'' Throughout the 1800's, many religious leaders were still trying to hold the line. As late as 1855, New York newspapers reported that Presbyterian, Baptist and Methodist churches were closed on Dec. 25 because ''they do not accept the day as a Holy One.'' On the eve of the Civil War, Christmas was recognized in just 18 states.Christmas gained popularity when it was transformed into a domestic celebration, after the publication of Clement Clarke Moore's ''Visit from St. Nicholas'' and Thomas Nast's Harper's Weekly drawings, which created the image of a white-bearded Santa who gave gifts to children. The new emphasis lessened religious leaders' worries that the holiday would be given over to drinking and swearing, but it introduced another concern: commercialism. By the 1920's, the retail industry had adopted Christmas as its own, sponsoring annual ceremonies to kick off the ''Christmas shopping season.''Religious leaders objected strongly. The Christmas that emerged had an inherent tension: merchants tried to make it about buying, while clergymen tried to keep commerce out. A 1931 Times roundup of Christmas sermons reported a common theme: ''the suggestion that Christmas could not survive if Christ were thrust into the background by materialism.'' A 1953 Methodist sermon broadcast on NBC -- typical of countless such sermons -- lamented that Christmas had become a ''profit-seeking period.'' This ethic found popular expression in ''A Charlie Brown Christmas.'' In the 1965 TV special, Charlie Brown ignores Lucy's advice to ''get the biggest aluminum tree you can find'' and her assertion that Christmas is ''a big commercial racket,'' and finds a more spiritual way to observe the day.This year's Christmas ''defenders'' are not just tolerating commercialization -- they're insisting on it. They are also rewriting Christmas history on another key point: non-Christians' objection to having the holiday forced on them.The campaign's leaders insist this is a new phenomenon -- a ''liberal plot,'' in Mr. Gibson's words. But as early as 1906, the Committee on Elementary Schools in New York City urged that Christmas hymns be banned from the classroom, after a boycott by more than 20,000 Jewish students. In 1946, the Rabbinical Assembly of America declared that calling on Jewish children to sing Christmas carols was ''an infringement on their rights as Americans.''Other non-Christians have long expressed similar concerns. For decades, companies have replaced ''Christmas parties'' with ''holiday parties,'' schools have adopted ''winter breaks'' instead of ''Christmas breaks,'' and TV stations and stores have used phrases like ''Happy Holidays'' and ''Season's Greetings'' out of respect for the nation's religious diversity.The Christmas that Mr. O'Reilly and his allies are promoting -- one closely aligned with retailers, with a smack-down attitude toward nonobservers -- fits with their campaign to make America more like a theocracy, with Christian displays on public property and Christian prayer in public schools.It does not, however, appear to be catching on with the public. That may be because most Americans do not recognize this commercialized, mean-spirited Christmas as their own. Of course, it's not even clear the campaign's leaders really believe in it. Just a few days ago, Fox News's online store was promoting its ''Holiday Collection'' for shoppers. Among the items offered to put under a ''holiday tree'' was ''The O'Reilly Factor Holiday Ornament.'' After bloggers pointed this out, Fox changed the ''holidays'' to ''Christmases.''Editorial Observer