maureen dowd
The Associated Press headline that came over the wire yesterday said it all: ''Gonzales Will Follow Non-Torture Policies.''You know how bad the situation is when the president's choice for attorney general has to formally pledge not to support torture anymore.Alberto Gonzales may have been willing to legally justify something that was abhorrent to everything America stands for, but it's all relative. Given that Mr. Gonzales is replacing the odious John Ashcroft, Democrats didn't seem inclined to try to derail the Hispanic nominee, even though his memo fostered the atmosphere that led to disgusting scandals in Abu Ghraib and Guantánamo.Just to get things started on the right foot, though, Mr. Gonzales planned to go the extra mile and offer the quaint, obsolete Senate Democrats a more nuanced explanation of why he called the Geneva Conventions ''quaint'' and ''obsolete.''Before he helped President Bush circumvent the accords and reserve the right to do so ''in this or future conflicts,'' you had to tune in to an old movie with Nazi generals or Vietcong guards if you wanted to see someone sneeringly shrug off the international treaty protecting prisoners from abuse. (''You worthless running dog Chuck Norris! What do we care about your silly Geneva Conventions?'')How are you to believe Mr. Gonzales when he says he's through with torture? His mission is clearly to do whatever he thinks Mr. Bush wants.All gall is divided into parts, so what's next?The Commerce Department nominee promising that giveaways to big business will be done with subtlety?The Environmental Protection Agency nominee promising that the toxin content in water will never rise to Yushchenko level?It's comforting to start the new year in the hands of a party that cares so much about morals and values.Tom DeLay and oily House Republicans inaugurated their new term by gutting ethics rules just in case any of them get caught in whatever misconduct they are plotting.Rummy continued on his oblivious, dissembling path, refusing to admit that he's tapped out the Army and broken the Army Reserve with what Lt. Gen. James Helmly, the frustrated chief of the Army Reserve, calls ''dysfunctional'' policies. We've gotten so numb on Iraq that when eight American soldiers and over 80 Iraqi police officers get killed, when the governor of Baghdad gets assassinated, and when our puppets plead with Mr. Bush to delay the elections, it all seems like just another week of pre-election maneuvering.In The Los Angeles Times, we learn that Bush fave Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas ''has accepted tens of thousands of dollars worth of gifts since joining the high court, including $1,200 worth of tires, valuable historical items and a $5,000 personal check to help pay a relative's education expenses.''A guy we pay nearly $200,000 a year can't pop for his own tires? Whatever happened to the dignity of the robe? At least we know where our possible future chief justice stands: on the side of personal corruption.''He also took a free trip aboard a private jet to the exclusive Bohemian Grove club in Northern California -- arranged by a wealthy Texas real estate investor who helped run an advocacy group that filed briefs with the Supreme Court,'' the paper said.The L.A. Times reviewed the disclosures of all nine justices for the years 1998 through 2003 and found that ''Thomas accepted $42,200 in gifts, making him the top recipient. Next in that period was Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, who accepted $5,825 in gifts, mostly small crystal figurines and other items.''Clarence Thomas follows Antonin Scalia's lead on the law. Why not also on ethics? Justice Scalia defended taking his relatives on a ride on Air Force Two to Louisiana with Dick Cheney to go duck hunting, even though the v.p. had an important case before the court, by saying that it would have been a ''considerable inconvenience'' to fly commercial.Going through a blistering confirmation hearing where his inappropriate behavior was questioned didn't teach Clarence Thomas much. Can we hope for anything better from Mr. Gonzales after he's waved through to be the man in charge of enforcing our laws?Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comThe president prides himself on being a pig-headed guy. He is determined to win in Iraq even if he is not winning in Iraq.So get ready for a Mohammedan mountain of spin defining victory down. Come what may -- civil war over oil, Iranian-style fatwas du jour or men on prayer rugs reciting the Koran all day on the Iraqi TV network our own geniuses created -- this administration will call it a triumph.Even for a White House steeped in hooey, it's a challenge. President Bush will have to emulate the parsing and prevaricating he disdained in his predecessor: It depends on what the meaning of the word ''win'' is.The president's still got a paper bag over his head, claiming that the daily horrors out of Iraq reflect just a few soreheads standing in the way of a glorious democracy, even though his commander of ground forces there concedes that the areas where more than half of Iraqis live are not secure enough for them to vote -- an acknowledgment that the insurgency is resilient and growing. It's like saying Montana and North Dakota are safe to vote, but New York, Philadelphia and L.A. are not. What's a little disenfranchisement among friends?''I know it's hard, but it's hard for a reason,'' Mr. Bush said on Friday, a day after seven G.I.'s and two marines died. ''And the reason it's hard is because there are a handful of folks who fear freedom.'' If it's just a handful, how come it's so hard?Then the president added: ''And I look at the elections as a -- as a -- you know, as a -- as -- as a historical marker for our Iraq policy.''Well, that's clear. Mr. Bush is huddled in his bubble, but he's in a pickle. The administration that had no plan for what to do with Iraq when it got it, now has no plan for getting out.The mood in Washington about our misadventure seemed to grow darker last week, maybe because lawmakers were back after visiting with their increasingly worried constituents and -- even more alarming -- visiting Iraq, where you still can't drive from the Baghdad airport to the Green Zone without fearing for your life.''It's going to be ugly,'' Joe Biden told Charlie Rose about the election.The arrogant Bush war council never admits a mistake. Paul Wolfowitz, a walking mistake, said on Friday he's been asked to remain in the administration. But the ''idealists,'' as the myopic dunderheads think of themselves, are obviously worried enough, now that Mr. Bush is safely re-elected, to let a little reality seep in. Rummy tapped a respected retired four-star general to go to Iraq this week for an open-ended review of the entire military meshugas.Mr. Wolfowitz, who devised the debacle in Iraq, is kept on, while Brent Scowcroft, Poppy Bush's lieutenant who warned Junior not to go into Iraq, is pushed out as chairman of the Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board. That's the backward nature of this beast: Deceive, you're golden; tell the truth, you're gone.Mr. Scowcroft was not deterred. Like Banquo's ghost, he clanked around last week, disputing the president's absurdly sunny forecasts for Iraq, and noting dryly that this administration had turned the word ''realist'' into a ''pejorative.'' He predicted that the elections ''have the great potential for deepening the conflict'' by exacerbating the divisions between Shiite and Sunni Muslims. He worried that there would be ''an incipient civil war,'' and said the best chance for the U.S. to avoid anarchy was to turn over the operation to the less inflammatory U.N. or NATO.Mr. Scowcroft appeared at the New America Foundation with Zbigniew Brzezinski, Jimmy Carter's national security adviser, who declared the Iraq war a moral, political and military failure. If we can't send 500,000 troops, spend $500 billion and agree to resume the draft, then the conflict should be ''terminated,'' he said, adding that far from the Jeffersonian democracy Mr. Bush extols, the most we can hope for is a Shiite-controlled theocracy.The Iraqi election that was meant to be the solution to the problem -- like the installation of a new Iraqi government and the transfer of sovereignty and all the other steps that were supposed to make things better -- may actually be making things worse. The election is going to expand the control of the Shiite theocrats, even beyond what their numbers would entitle them to have, because of the way the Bush team has set it up and the danger that if you're a Sunni, the vote you cast may be your last.It is a lesson never learned: Matters of state and the heart that start with a lie rarely end well.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comCorrection:  January 11, 2005, Tuesday  Because of an editing error, a front-page article on Friday about an American military commander's appraisal of security for elections to be held in Iraq on Jan. 30 misstated the portion of Iraq's population that lives in the four provinces he deemed unsafe for voting. (The error was repeated on Sunday in an Op-Ed column by Maureen Dowd.) The portion is 42.5 percent, not more than half.A chart with the article on Friday employed outdated population statistics. The number of people in the 14 provinces considered safe for voting totals 16.1 million, not 12.7 million; the number in the unsafe provinces total 11.9 million, not 9.4 million.A few years ago at a White House Correspondents' dinner, I met a very beautiful actress. Within moments, she blurted out: ''I can't believe I'm 46 and not married. Men only want to marry their personal assistants or P.R. women.''I'd been noticing a trend along these lines, as famous and powerful men took up with the young women whose job it was to tend to them and care for them in some way: their secretaries, assistants, nannies, caterers, flight attendants, researchers and fact-checkers.Women in staff support are the new sirens because, as a guy I know put it, they look upon the men they work for as ''the moon, the sun and the stars.'' It's all about orbiting, serving and salaaming their Sun Gods.In all those great Tracy/Hepburn movies more than a half-century ago, it was the snap and crackle of a romance between equals that was so exciting. Moviemakers these days seem far more interested in the soothing aura of romances between unequals.In James Brooks's ''Spanglish,'' Adam Sandler, as a Los Angeles chef, falls for his hot Mexican maid. The maid, who cleans up after Mr. Sandler without being able to speak English, is presented as the ideal woman. The wife, played by Téa Leoni, is repellent: a jangly, yakking, overachieving, overexercised, unfaithful, shallow she-monster who has just lost her job with a commercial design firm. Picture Faye Dunaway in ''Network'' if she'd had to stay home, or Glenn Close in ''Fatal Attraction'' without the charm.The same attraction of unequals animated 2003's holiday hit, Richard Curtis's ''Love Actually.'' The witty and sophisticated British prime minister, played by Hugh Grant, falls for the chubby girl who wheels the tea and scones into his office. A businessman married to the substantial Emma Thompson falls for his sultry secretary. A writer falls for his maid, who speaks only Portuguese.(I wonder if the trend in making maids who don't speak English heroines is related to the trend of guys who like to watch Kelly Ripa in the morning with the sound turned off?)Art is imitating life, turning women who seek equality into selfish narcissists and objects of rejection, rather than affection.As John Schwartz of The New York Times wrote recently, ''Men would rather marry their secretaries than their bosses, and evolution may be to blame.''A new study by psychology researchers at the University of Michigan, using college undergraduates, suggests that men going for long-term relationships would rather marry women in subordinate jobs than women who are supervisors.As Dr. Stephanie Brown, the lead author of the study, summed it up for reporters: ''Powerful women are at a disadvantage in the marriage market because men may prefer to marry less-accomplished women.'' Men think that women with important jobs are more likely to cheat on them.''The hypothesis,'' Dr. Brown said, ''is that there are evolutionary pressures on males to take steps to minimize the risk of raising offspring that are not their own.'' Women, by contrast, did not show a marked difference in their attraction to men who might work above or below them. And men did not show a preference when it came to one-night stands.A second study by researchers at four British universities that was reported last week suggested that smart men with demanding jobs would rather have old-fashioned wives, like their mums, than equals. The study found that a high I.Q. hampers a woman's chance to get married, while it is a plus for men. The prospect for marriage increased by 35 percent for guys for each 16-point increase in I.Q.; for women, there is a 40 percent drop for each 16-point rise.So was the feminist movement some sort of cruel hoax? The more women achieve, the less desirable they are? Women want to be in a relationship with guys they can seriously talk to -- unfortunately, a lot of those guys want to be in relationships with women they don't have to talk to.I asked the actress and writer Carrie Fisher, on the East Coast to promote her novel ''The Best Awful,'' who confirmed that women who challenge men are in trouble.''I haven't dated in 12 million years,'' she said drily. ''I gave up on dating powerful men because they wanted to date women in the service professions. So I decided to date guys in the service professions. But then I found out that kings want to be treated like kings, and consorts want to be treated like kings, too.''Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comLawrence Summers, the president of Harvard, has been pilloried for suggesting that women may be biologically unsuited to succeed at mathematics.He may have a point.Just look at Condoleezza Rice.She's clearly a well-educated, intelligent woman, versed in Brahms and the Bolsheviks, who has just been rewarded for her loyalty with the most plum assignment in the second Bush cabinet.Yet her math skills are woefully inadequate.She can't do simple equations. She doesn't even know that X times zero equals zero. If you multiply 1,370 dead soldiers times zero weapons of mass destruction, that equals zero achievement for Ms. Rice, who helped the president and vice president bamboozle the country into war.Was Condi out doing figure eights at the ice skating rink when she should have been home learning her figures? She couldn't have spent much time studying classic word problems: If two trains leave Chicago at noon, one going south at 20 miles an hour and one going north at 30 miles an hour, how far will each have gotten by midnight?Otherwise, she might have realized that if two cars leave the Baghdad airport at noon on the main highway into the capital of Iraq, neither one is going to get there with any living passengers. Our 22 months at war have not added up to that one major highway's being secured.It's lucky for Ms. Rice that she's serving with men who are just as lame at numbers as she is. Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz couldn't be bothered to tally correctly the number of dead soldiers when he testified before Congress. And his boss, Donald Rumsfeld, didn't realize that using an autopen signature on more than 1,000 letters to the relatives of fallen troops added up to zero solace.Our new top diplomat has obviously not mastered fractions. When she asserted during her confirmation hearing that 120,000 Iraqi troops had been trained, Senator Joe Biden corrected her, saying she was off by a bit. His calculation of trained Iraqi troops was actually 4,000 -- hers was 30 times that. Maybe she's confusing hyperbole and hypotenuse.Her geometry is skewed if she thinks she'll now be more powerful than Rummy and Dick Cheney. Doesn't she know that the Pentagon has more sides than her Crawford triangle with George and Laura?She could at least have read ''The Da Vinci Code.'' Then she would have learned about Fibonacci numbers, a recurring mathematical pattern in nature. When you invade a country, you should expect an insurgency. Or, as Fibonacci might have calculated it, if you kill one jihadist, two more arrive to take his place; if you kill three, five more pop up; if you get five, eight more appear, and so on.The incoming secretary of state and her colleagues are, alas, also lousy at economics. After Bush officials promised that the postwar expenses would be covered by Iraqi oil revenues, we find ourselves spending $1 billion a week of our own money.Ms. Rice and her fellow imperialists know so little about physics that they arrogantly jumped into ''spooky action at a distance,'' turning the country they had hoped to make into a model democracy into a training ground for international terrorists, a nucleus for a new generation of radioactively dangerous fanatics.How could they forget Newton's third law: for every action, there's an equal and opposite reaction?The administration needs a lesson in subtraction. How do we subtract our troops and replace them with Iraqi troops while the terrorists keep subtracting Iraqi troops with car bombs and rocket-propelled grenades?Condi may not know Einstein's theory of relativity, but she has a fine grasp of Cheney's theory of moral relativity. Because they're the good guys, they can do anything: dissembling to get into war; flattening Iraqi cities to save them; replacing the Geneva Conventions with unconventional ways of making prisoners talk. The only equation the Bushies know is this one: Might = Right.It is puzzling that if you add X (no exit strategy) to Y (Why are we there?) you get W2: George Bush's second inauguration.At Condi's hearing, she justified the Bush administration's misadventures by saying history would prove it right. ''I know enough about history to stand back and to recognize that you judge decisions not at the moment, but in how it all adds up,'' she told a skeptical Senator Biden.Problem is, she's calculating, but she can't add. For now, Sam Cooke is right about the Bushies. They don't know much about history.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comI should have known.I can't believe I thought he was just an innocent little sponge wearing tight shorts.What in the name of Davy Jones's locker would a sponge be doing holding hands with a starfish or donning purple and hot-pink flowered garb to redecorate the Krusty Krab if he weren't a perverted invertebrate?Before this is over, we're going to find out that SpongeBob is the illicit spawn of the Tampa shock jock Bubba the Love Sponge. Who knew SpongeBob would become as fraught as the cover of ''Abbey Road''?It took Dr. James Dobson, the conservative Christian leader and gay marriage opponent, who claims the president's re-election was more a mandate for his ideas than George Bush's, to point out the insidious underside of the popular cartoon character SpongeBob SquarePants. It takes a sponge to brainwash a child.Holy Abe! Dr. Dobson outed SpongeBob at a black-tie inaugural fete last week for members of Congress and political allies. He said that a ''pro-homosexual video'' -- starring SpongeBob, Barney, Jimmy Neutron, Winnie the Pooh, Kermit the Frog and Miss Piggy -- was set to go to elementary schools to promote a ''tolerance pledge,'' including tolerance for differences of ''sexual identity.''Hoppin' clams, as they say in Bikini Bottom, the den of epicene iniquity where SpongeBob lives. Nothing good can come of tolerance.Dan Martinsen, a spokesman for Nickelodeon, where SpongeBob beats the pants off the competition, was flummoxed: ''It's a sponge, for crying out loud. He has no sexuality.''Dr. Dobson has done the country a service by reminding us to watch out for the dark side of lovable but malleable sponges. He inspired me to fish through the president's Inaugural Address with a more skeptical eye.Mr. Bush's epic pledge to support democratic movements and institutions in every nation and to end ''tyranny in our world'' may seem wildly pie-in-the-sky, given that the Iraq vortex has drained our military.Although his incendiary speech about ''the untamed fire of freedom'' has been widely interpreted as a code-red warning to both foes and friends, I wonder if the president knew he was literally promising to stamp out undemocratic governments across the globe, which would include some of our top allies. He probably thought it was a fancier way of repackaging the Iraq invasion, not as a failed search for W.M.D., but as a blow for freedom (a word used 27 times) and liberty (used 15 times).I wonder if W. is surprised that people took it literally. The Bushes don't always understand that they're being held to their rhetoric in major speeches. (Read my warships.) For such a brass-knuckled vision, the president's delivery was curiously unemotional.Some of the same advisers who filled Mr. Bush's brain with sugary visions of a quick and painless Iraq makeover did mean the speech to be literal; they are drawing up military options for the rest of the Middle East. Once again, the lovable and malleable president seems to be soaking up the martial mind-set of those around him, almost like a sponge.SpongeBush SquarePants!We can only hope that Dr. Dobson doesn't pick up on the resemblance. SpongeBob, as his song goes, ''lives in a pineapple under the sea/absorbent and yellow and porous is he!'' SpongeBush lives in a bubble in D.C./absorbent and shallow and porous is he!SpongeBush ensnared the country in a whale of a mess in Iraq because he guilelessly absorbed the neocons' dire warnings about Saddam's weapons capabilities and their rosy assumptions about Ahmad Chalabi's leadership capabilities.Dick Cheney is a gruff Mr. Krabs taskmaster to SpongeBush, but SpongeBush is crazy about him anyhow. W. trustingly let his vice president make the worst-case scenario about Iraq a first-case scenario.Mr. Bush might have thought he was just blowing pretty bubbles full of lofty ideals about freedom and liberty in his speech, but Mr. Cheney and the neocons seem intent on filleting Iran and Syria. (Doesn't Richard Perle remind you of the snarky and pretentious next-door neighbor to SpongeBob, Squidward Tentacles?)The vice president told Don Imus that Iran was ''right at the top of the list'' of trouble spots, and that Israel ''might well decide to act first'' with a military strike.Even if he's a little light in the flippers, SpongeBob has brought children good, clean fun. SpongeBush has brought the world dark, endless fights.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comI'm herewith resigning as a member of the liberal media elite.I'm joining up with the conservative media elite. They get paid better.First comes news that Armstrong Williams got $240,000 from the Education Department to plug the No Child Left Behind Act.The families of soldiers killed in Iraq get a paltry $12,000. But good publicity? Priceless.Mr. Williams helped out the first President Bush and Clarence Thomas during the Anita Hill scandal. Mr. Williams, who served as Mr. Thomas's personal assistant at the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission when the future Supreme Court justice was gutting policies that would help blacks, gleefully attacked Professor Hill, saying, ''Sister has emotional problems,'' and telling The Wall Street Journal ''there is a thin line between her sanity and insanity.''Now we learn from the media reporter Howard Kurtz that the syndicated columnist Maggie Gallagher had a $21,500 contract from the Health and Human Services Department to work on material promoting the agency's $300 million initiative to encourage marriage. Ms. Gallagher earned her money, even praising Mr. Bush in print as a ''genius'' at playing ''daddy'' to the nation. ''Mommies feel your pain,'' she wrote in 2002. ''Daddies give you confidence that you can ignore the pain and get on with life.''Genius? Not so much. Spendthrift? Definitely. W.'s administration was running up his astounding deficit paying ''journalists'' to do what they would be happy to do for free -- just to be friends with benefits, getting access that tougher scribes are denied. Consider Charles Krauthammer, who went to the White House on Jan. 10 for what The Washington Post termed a ''consultation'' on the inaugural speech and then praised the Jan. 20th address on Fox News as ''revolutionary,'' says Media Matters, a liberal watchdog group.I still have many Christmas bills to pay. So I'd like to send a message to the administration: THIS SPACE AVAILABLE.I could write about the strong dollar and the shrinking deficit. Or defend Torture Boy, I mean, the esteemed and sage Alberto Gonzales. Or remind readers of the terrific job Condi Rice did coordinating national security before 9/11 -- who could have interpreted a memo titled ''Bin Laden Determined to Attack Inside the United States'' as a credible threat? -- not to mention her indefatigable energy obscuring information that undercut the vice president's dementia on Iraq.My preference is to get a contract with Rummy. It would be cost effective, compared with the $80 billion he needs to train more Iraqi security forces to be blown up. For half a mil, I could write a doozy of a column promoting Rummy's phantasmagoric policies.What is all this hand-wringing about the 31 marines who died in a helicopter crash in Iraq yesterday? It's only slightly more than the number of people who died in traffic accidents in California last Memorial Day. The president set the right tone, avoiding pathos when asked about the crash. ''Obviously,'' he said, ''any time we lose life it is a sad moment.''Who can blame Rummy for carrying out torture policies? We're in an information age. Information is power. If people are not giving you the intelligence you want, you must customize to get the intelligence you want to hear.That's why Rummy also had to twist U.S. laws to secretly form his own C.I.A. A Pentagon memo said Rummy's recruited agents could include ''notorious figures,'' whose ties to the U.S. would be embarrassing if revealed, according to The Washington Post. Why shouldn't a notorious figure like Rummy recruit notorious figures?I could write a column denouncing John McCain for trying to call hearings into Rummy's new spy unit, suggesting the senator is just jealous because Rummy's sexy enough to play James Bond.The president might need my help as well. He looked out of it yesterday when asked why his foreign policy is so drastically different from the one laid out in Foreign Affairs magazine in 2000 by Ms. Rice -- a preview that did not emphasize promoting democracy and liberty around the world. ''I didn't read the article,'' Mr. Bush said.And why should he? Robert McNamara never read the Pentagon Papers. Why should W. have to bone up on his own foreign policy?Freedom means the freedom to be free from reading what you promise voters and other stuff. I could make that case, if the price were right.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comCorrection:  February 1, 2005, Tuesday  An editorial last Thursday incompletely described the contract between the Health and Human Services Department and the conservative columnist Maggie Gallagher. The department paid Ms. Gallagher $21,500 as a consultant on marriage policies, including for help in drafting an essay that was published under the name of an assistant secretary. Ms. Gallagher said the contract did not include promoting the administration's policies in her columns.By the time House Republicans were finished with him, Bill Clinton must have thought of a thong as a torture device.For the Bush administration, it actually is.A former American Army sergeant who worked as an Arabic interpreter at Gitmo has written a book pulling back the veil on the astounding ways female interrogators used a toxic combination of sex and religion to try to break Muslim detainees at the U.S. prison camp in Cuba. It's not merely disgusting. It's beyond belief.The Bush administration never worries about anything. But these missionaries and zealous protectors of values should be worried about the American soul. The president never mentions Osama, but he continues to use 9/11 as an excuse for American policies that bend the rules and play to our worst instincts.''I have really struggled with this because the detainees, their families and much of the world will think this is a religious war based on some of the techniques used, even though it is not the case,'' the former sergeant, Erik R. Saar, 29, told The Associated Press. The A.P. got a manuscript of his book, deemed classified pending a Pentagon review.What good is it for President Bush to speak respectfully of Islam and claim Iraq is not a religious war if the Pentagon denigrates Islamic law -- allowing its female interrogators to try to make Muslim men talk in late-night sessions featuring sexual touching, displays of fake menstrual blood, and parading in miniskirt, tight T-shirt, bra and thong underwear?It's like a bad porn movie, ''The Geneva Monologues.'' All S and no M.The A.P. noted that ''some Guantánamo prisoners who have been released say they were tormented by 'prostitutes.'''Mr. Saar writes about what he calls ''disturbing'' practices during his time in Gitmo from December 2002 to June 2003, including this anecdote related by Paisley Dodds, an A.P. reporter:A female military interrogator who wanted to turn up the heat on a 21-year-old Saudi detainee who allegedly had taken flying lessons in Arizona before 9/11 removed her uniform top to expose a snug T-shirt. She began belittling the prisoner -- who was praying with his eyes closed -- as she touched her breasts, rubbed them against the Saudi's back and commented on his apparent erection.After the prisoner spat in her face, she left the room to ask a Muslim linguist how she could break the prisoner's reliance on God. The linguist suggested she tell the prisoner that she was menstruating, touch him, and then shut off the water in his cell so he couldn't wash.''The concept was to make the detainee feel that after talking to her he was unclean and was unable to go before his God in prayer and gain strength,'' Mr. Saar recounted, adding: ''She then started to place her hands in her pants as she walked behind the detainee. As she circled around him he could see that she was taking her hand out of her pants. When it became visible the detainee saw what appeared to be red blood on her hand. She said, 'Who sent you to Arizona?' He then glared at her with a piercing look of hatred. She then wiped the red ink on his face. He shouted at the top of his lungs, spat at her and lunged forward,'' breaking out of an ankle shackle.''He began to cry like a baby,'' the author wrote, adding that the interrogator's parting shot was: ''Have a fun night in your cell without any water to clean yourself.''A female civilian contractor kept her ''uniform'' -- a thong and miniskirt -- on the back of the door of an interrogation room, the author says.Who are these women? Who allows this to happen? Why don't the officers who allow it get into trouble? Why do Rummy and Paul Wolfowitz still have their jobs?The military did not deny the specifics, but said the prisoners were treated ''humanely'' and in a way consistent ''with legal obligations prohibiting torture.'' However the Bush White House is redefining torture these days, the point is this: Such behavior degrades the women who are doing it, the men they are doing it to, and the country they are doing it for.There's nothing wrong with trying to squeeze information out of detainees. But isn't it simply more effective to throw them in isolation and try to build some sort of relationship?I doubt that the thong tease works as well on inmates at Gitmo as it did on Bill Clinton in the Oval Office.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comI went to see Al Pacino's ''Merchant of Venice'' movie the other day.It was funny to watch the climactic courtroom scene in which the cross-dressing Portia sets a dazzling legal trap for the cross Shylock.The vengeful loan shark can take his pound of flesh from Antonio, she tells him, but it has to be exactly a pound. And if Antonio bleeds, the laws of Venice dictate that all of Shylock's lands and goods will be confiscated.The 16th-century Shylock skulks off. A 21st-century Shylock would have had a solution: liposuction.Shylock could have extracted his precise pound of flesh, and the fashionably epicene Antonio could have come out of it looking even sleeker.Shakespeare wrote a lot about the power of beauty and the withering of beauty. As one pre-Botox sonnet went: ''When forty winters shall besiege thy brow/And dig deep trenches in thy beauty's field,/Thy youth's proud livery, so gazed on now,/Will be a tattered weed of small worth held.''Shakespeare also wrote about narcissistic personalities and the treacheries of time. So I'm sure he would have been fascinated by the obsession of our modern culture with freezing the clock -- and the face -- with lifestyle drugs and medical treatments.Cosmetic enhancements have become so common that you can now get ''frequent flier'' cards for wrinkles -- racking up rewards every time a dermatologist or a plastic surgeon sticks a needle in your face.The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that, following up on Pfizer's success with Viagra ''value cards,'' which offer repeat customers discounts, Medicis Pharmaceuticals, the maker of Restylane, an anti-wrinkle skin filler, is offering a rewards program ''to encourage injections every six months by offering gifts that escalate in value with each subsequent appointment -- adding up to $375 after the fourth follow-up visit.''A Restylane treatment is about $500 to $750 and lasts about six months, according to the article. So Medicis says it aims to keep customers on track to maintain their ''corrected look.''You just get the Restylane syringe box top from your doctor and send it in, as you used to do with cereal boxes to get toys. And you can keep your ''corrected look'' going until you hit that ''Alas, poor Yorick'' phase.What Shakespeare could have done with this material. And wouldn't you love to hear the Bard on the Oscars?Others found the Oscars boring; I found the show slightly alarming.I used to worry that women were heading toward one face. Sometimes in affluent settings, like the Oscars or the shoe department at Bergdorf's, you see a bunch of eerily similar women with oddly off-track features -- Botox-smoothed Formica foreheads, collagen-protruding lips, surgically narrowed noses, taut jaws -- who look like sisters from another planet.It's like that futuristic Sylvester Stallone movie ''Demolition Man,'' set in 2032, with Arnold Schwarzenegger as president and Taco Bell as the sole survivor of the Franchise Wars.In the future, there will be only one face. And if the Oscars are predictive, there will be only one body -- big chest, skinny body -- and one style. It was bizarre how actress after actress came out in the same mermaid silhouette: a strapless sheath with a trumpet-flared or ruffled skirt.Where are the good old wardrobe malfunctions of Cher and Barbra?In decades past, each top glamour girl aimed for a signature face and measurements, a trademark voice, a unique walk. You never saw Katharine Hepburn and Ava Gardner showing up in the same dress, or Audrey Hepburn and Marilyn Monroe looking like a pair of matching candles.In some wacky, self-defeating conspiracy, stylists have joined forces with surgeons to homogenize today's actresses so it's hard to tell one from another; the Oscars had a safe, boring, generic look. Top female stars who have had a lot of work done start looking like one another on magazine covers, and being confused for one another at publicity events.Chris Rock was right: star power is in short supply in a town where women would rather be conventional than individual. It's the same problem Hollywood has making movies: too much cloning, not enough originality.As Shakespeare wrote of the ultimate glamour girl, Cleopatra: ''Age cannot wither her, nor custom stale her infinite variety.''Women have become so fixated on not withering, they've forgotten that there are infinite ways to be beautiful.Op-Ed ColumnistArabs put their women in veils. We put ours in the stocks.Every culture has its own way of tamping down female power, be it sexual, political or financial. Americans like to see women who wear the pants be beaten up and humiliated. Afterward, in a gratifying redemption ritual, people like to see the battered women be rewarded.That's how Hilary Swank won two Oscars. That's how Hillary Clinton won a Senate seat and a presidential front-runner spot. And that's how Martha Stewart won her own reality TV show and became a half-billion dollars richer while she was in prison.We've come a long way, baby, from the era of witch trials, when women with special power who knew how to curse were burned at the stake. Now, after a public comeuppance, they are staked to a lucrative new career. In this century, the scarlet letter morphs into a dollar sign.Maybe temperamental, power-mad divas always needed to be brought down a peg. They used to do it to themselves. Judy Garland and Marilyn Monroe were gorgeous monsters, but were so self-destructive there was no need to punish them further.But Hillary and Martha -- the domestic diva with the new ankle bracelet echoed Judy Garland on her Web site yesterday that ''there is no place like home'' -- are not self-destructive. They are brass-knuckled survivors who elicit both admiration and an enmity that Alessandra Stanley memorably dubbed ''blondenfreude.''From pornography to ''Desperate Housewives,'' women being degraded has an entertainment value far greater than men being degraded. People liked Hillary and Martha a lot more once they were ''broken,'' like one of Martha's saddle horses, ice queens melted into puddles of vulnerability.Maybe it's because both women sometimes overreached, treated the help badly and displayed an unseemly greedy streak. Maybe it's because a dichotomy about their roles made them seem disingenuous: they gained renown for traditional feminine roles, and apron-and-hearth books, assuming guises to achieve male power and taking a route to the mahogany epicenter through the kitchen.Hillary was America's first lady, photographed smiling in her designer dress as she oversaw table settings and placement for state dinners, even though we knew she did not care about such domestic piffle and was instead maneuvering to take over huge chunks of domestic policy.Martha was America's first lady of gold-leaf designer lifestyle nesting, even though we knew that her über-nest was so scary that her husband had flown the coop. Though she was the ultimate professional homemaker and nurturer, she left her daughter out of the litany of things -- cats, canaries, horses, chickens and dogs -- she would miss in jail.Obviously, many men are uncomfortable with successful women, so when these women are brushed back, alpha men can take comfort in knowing that alphettes are not threateningly all-powerful and that they had better soften those sharp edges.I learned covering Geraldine Ferraro's vice presidential bid that the reaction of women to extraordinarily successful women is also ambivalent, with as much hostility as sisterly pride. An Icarus crash can mitigate the jealousy, while intensifying the feminist attachment.After her husband's philandering with Monica, Hillary played the victim card all the way to the Senate. After her own bad judgment about her stocks, Martha metamorphosed from jailbird to phoenix.Why don't we need to see Oprah, another titan known by her first name, slapped back? Probably because Oprah never had an icy or phony side to her public persona and because her struggles in her childhood and with her weight take the edge off any animus that might be leveled at her for a net worth of $1.3 billion.And what about Condi, who's now being touted for the Republican ticket in 2008? Perhaps she does not need to play the victim to make people feel better about her power because she was never seen as a termagant, pushing people around and bending them to her will. She always seemed subservient to President Bush and Vice President Dick Cheney, a willing handmaiden and spokesman for their bellicose bidding.One Democratic image maker admiringly predicts that, having survived their virago and victim phases, our two most relentless blondes will outlast everyone: ''When the world ends, there will be left only a few cockroaches, Cher, Hillary and Martha.''Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comIn sports, the offense is more glamorous. It moves the ball, it scores, and everybody breaks out the high-fives. It's all about flash and glory.Defense, on the other hand, toils in anonymity. It's about wrestling in the trenches, digging in your heels and fighting the opposition for every inch. The most important unit of the last undefeated team in the National Football League, the 1972 Miami Dolphins, was tagged the No-Name Defense.Republicans understand the publicity advantage of a relentless offense. They had a flashy offense in W.'s two presidential campaigns and two wars, and in their war on the press.In his 2002 pre-emptive doctrine, laying the groundwork for attacking Iraq, President Bush was reputed to have written the line, ''We recognize that our best defense is a good offense.''W. successfully confused Americans by labeling the invasion of Iraq an offensive thrust in the war on terror, even though Iraq had played no role in the 9/11 attacks, had no ties with Al Qaeda and had no weapons to share with terrorists. But 9/11 was an emasculating blow, and the White House had to strike back at somebody.What the administration doesn't acknowledge, as it crows about democracy blooming in the Iraqi desert, is that our defense against terrorists who want to attack here is full of holes, and that the war in Iraq may have made it even worse. Despite the promising election, the war has created more insurgents and given them a training ground. It has siphoned off attention, money and troops that could have been used to catch Osama, pursue Al Qaeda and secure our own country. And it has alienated not only many Arabs, but also allies who were eager, after 9/11, to help us fight Al Qaeda -- even Italians are mad now.Every time we turn around, some administration official charged with our protection is claiming that it will take three more years, or five more, to fix something that should have been put in place right after 9/11 -- or even 20 years ago.The F.B.I. has abandoned its latest computer follies: the $170 million effort to upgrade the bureau's computer system so analysts can accomplish such difficult tasks as simultaneously searching for ''aviation'' and ''schools.'' Now it's going to take at least three and a half years to develop a new system. Bill Gates has been donating computers and software to poor grade schools; maybe he could take pity on the poor F.B.I. and donate a system that works.One of the first big stories I covered was the homecoming of the hostages from Iran in 1981. Nearly a quarter of a century later, we still don't have good intelligence on Iran. The Times reported yesterday that a bipartisan presidential panel is set to report that the lack of American intelligence on Iran's nuclear capability is scandalously inadequate. Our intelligence on Iraqi weapons systems was so bad that we had to go to war to find out that Iraq didn't have any.Our intelligence services are only now trying to recruit agents who speak Arabic and Farsi? Who didn't realize after the Iranian hostage crisis that it might be smart to invest in some spies who could infiltrate the places that were calling us Satan? President Carter lost an election because he didn't know what was going on in Iran, and President Bush still doesn't know.Now that they've belatedly started to recruit Arabic speakers -- after the military forced out more than 300 linguists considered important to the war in terror in the past decade because they happened to be gay -- our intelligence agencies are not sure whether they're signing up the good guys or the bad guys. We can't get into Al Qaeda's inner councils, but has Al Qaeda gotten inside ours?The Los Angeles Times reported on Tuesday that about 40 Americans seeking jobs at U.S. intelligence agencies were turned away because of possible ties to terrorist groups. Paul Redmond, a longtime C.I.A. officer, said it was an ''actuarial certainty'' that spies had infiltrated U.S. security agencies: ''I think we're worse off than we've ever been.''At the same time, dozens of terror suspects on federal watch lists have been allowed to buy firearms legally in our country, according to a G.A.O. investigation. No wonder Porter Goss, the new C.I.A. director, seems dazed and confused.While the president and the neocons try to remake the Middle East to help future generations, can't they find a little time to remake our security to protect this generation?Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comWhen I need to work up my nerve to write a tough column, I try to think of myself as Emma Peel in a black leather catsuit, giving a kung fu kick to any diabolical mastermind who merits it.I try not to visualize myself as one of the witches in ''Macbeth,'' sitting off to the side over a double, double toil and trouble, bubbling cauldron, muttering about what is fair or foul in the hurly burly of the royal court.There's an intense debate going on now about why newspapers have so few female columnists. Out of what will soon be eight Times Op-Ed columnists -- nine, counting the public editor -- I'm the only woman.In 1996, after six months on the job, I went to Howell Raines, the editorial page editor, to try to get out of the column. I was a bundle of frayed nerves. I felt as though I were in a ''Godfather'' movie, shooting and getting shot at. Men enjoy verbal dueling. As a woman, I told Howell, I wanted to be liked -- not attacked. He said I could go back to The Metro Section; I decided to give it another try. Bill Safire told me I needed Punzac, Prozac for pundits.Guys don't appreciate being lectured by a woman. It taps into myths of carping Harpies and hounding Furies, and distaste for nagging by wives and mothers. The word ''harridan'' derives from the French word ''haridelle'' -- a worn-out horse or nag.Men take professional criticism more personally when it comes from a woman. When I wrote columns about the Clinton impeachment opéra bouffe, Chris Matthews said that for poor Bill, it must feel as though he had another wife hectoring him.While a man writing a column taking on the powerful may be seen as authoritative, a woman doing the same thing may be seen as castrating. If a man writes a scathing piece about men in power, it's seen as his job; a woman can be cast as an emasculating man-hater. I'm often asked how I can be so ''mean'' -- a question that Tom Friedman, who writes plenty of tough columns, doesn't get.Even the metaphors used to describe my column play into the castration theme: my scalpel, my cutting barbs, razor-sharp hatchet, Clinton-skewering and Bush-whacking. ''Does she,'' The L.A. Times's Patt Morrison wondered, ''write on a computer or a Ronco Slicer and Dicer?''In 1998, Bill Clinton made a castration joke about me at a press dinner, as I sank down in my seat. I called Alan Dundes, a renowned folklorist, to ask about it. ''Women are supposed to take it, not dish it out,'' he replied. ''If a woman embarrasses a man, he feels inadequate, effeminate. He wants her to go back to the kitchen.''The kerfuffle over female columnists started when Susan Estrich launched a crazed and nasty smear campaign against Michael Kinsley, the L.A. Times editorial page editor, trying to force him to run her humdrum syndicated column.Given the appalling way she's handled herself, Susan -- an acquaintance for many years -- is the last person Michael, a friend of mine, should hire. But he should recruit some more talented women to write for him. So should The Times, The Washington Post -- which also has only one female columnist -- and anyone else who has an obvious gender gap on their op-ed pages.Gail Collins, the first woman to run The Times's editorial page and the author of a history of American women, told The Post's Howard Kurtz: ''There are probably fewer women, in the great cosmic scheme of things, who feel comfortable writing very straight opinion stuff, and they're less comfortable hearing something on the news and batting something out.''There's a lot of evidence of that. Male bloggers predominate, as do male TV shouters. Men I know and men who read The Times write me constantly, asking me to read the opinion pieces they've written. Sometimes they'll e-mail or fax me their thoughts to read right before I have lunch with them. Women hardly ever send their own rants.There's been a dearth of women writing serious opinion pieces for top news organizations, even as there's been growth in female sex columnists for college newspapers. Going from Tess Harding to Carrie Bradshaw, Dorothy Thompson to Candace Bushnell, is not progress.This job has not come easily to me. But I have no doubt there are plenty of brilliant women who would bring grace and guts to our nation's op-ed pages, just as, Lawrence Summers notwithstanding, there are plenty of brilliant women out there who are great at math and science. We just need to find and nurture them.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comAt the Gridiron Dinner in Washington on Saturday, where Old Media gently mocked politicians with corny songs, I sat next to a presidential gag writer, Landon Parvin. He was saying jokes work best when Republicans make fun of Republicans and Democrats make fun of Democrats.President Bush, looking spiffy in white tie and tails, swung by to talk to Mr. Parvin. He didn't look my way, but proceeded back up to the dais.Suddenly, W. turned around, stopped and looked right at me. Then he flashed a wink, not a flirty wink but a mischievous Clark Gable ''I've got your number and you think you've got mine but I win'' wink.Bush had a cold, but he was feeling pretty hot.He started his presidency with a tentative demeanor and a chip on his shoulder. Now, even with the Middle East still roiling and the Democrats still spoiling for a fight over Social Security, W. feels as if he's won a lot of hands and has a big pile of chips.He's confident enough to send two unilateralist hawks who specialize in blowing off the globe -- John Bolton and Paul Wolfowitz -- to run global institutions that epitomize multilateralism. (Wolfie's biggest qualification to run the World Bank? His prediction that Iraqi reconstruction would pay for itself with Iraqi oil revenues.)In The Washington Post, the reporter Mark Leibovich wrote that the president has been almost like a different person since the Iraqi elections, so loosey-goosey as he tries to sell his Social Security agenda and other programs that ''he is resembling a Texas auctioneer pitching private accounts on the borscht belt.''When a woman at an Arkansas town meeting last month told W. she was from De Queen, he replied, ''That is right next to De King.''At the Gridiron, Mr. Bush slyly joked that he had the ''dangedest puppy'' who would roll over on command -- but only some of the time. ''I renamed him 'John McCain.'''I may have gotten a presidential wink, but I still don't have my regular White House pass back. (Maybe I'd get it back if I became a male escort?) But Bush aides have now decided to let in a blogger. Maybe they're grateful that bloodhound bloggers ran off Dan Rather.But this White House may not like New Media any more than Old Media. It's already moved on to Fake Media.Here is yesterday's headline on the humorist Andy Borowitz's Web site: ''White House Reporter Turns Out to Be Cheney. Fake Mustache Falls Off Veep During Press Briefing.''The White House isn't backing off its plan to replace real news with faux news. The Bushies created their own reality to convince the country that Iraq was a threat to U.S. security. So even though the war has given birth to some of the very evils it was supposed to fix -- like more recruits for Osama, and Saddam's formerly sealed weapons' falling into terrorists' hands -- Bushies like the results of their war.Now the White House has its own gulag: C.I.A. agents snatch suspects and fly them to places like Egypt and Syria to be strung up in chains and tortured. And The Times reported yesterday that at least 26 deaths of prisoners in American custody in Iraq and Afghanistan may be criminal homicides. So it also has its own Soviet-style propaganda campaign.At his news conference yesterday, the president bristled a bit when a reporter reminded him that after it was revealed that his administration was paying columnists to shill for agency programs, Mr. Bush had ordered that such tactics cease.But, as the reporter noted, the administration is still using government money to produce stories about the government that are broadcast with no disclosure that the government is producing them.David Barstow and Robin Stein wrote in The Times on Sunday that at least 20 agencies had made and distributed fake news segments to local TV stations; the administration spent $254 million in its first four years to buy self-aggrandizing puffery from P.R. firms.The president joked that he could tack on an ''I'm George W. Bush and I approved this disclaimer.'' But then he said he wouldn't -- that it was up to local stations to reveal the truth.He said his Justice Department had found that the fake news programs are ''within the law so long as they're based upon facts, not advocacy.''And, of course, this is a White House that never makes up facts to suit its purposes or sell its programs. It serves its propaganda baldfaced, with no hint of its real agenda.At least I got a wink.E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comMen are always telling me not to generalize about them.But a startling new study shows that science is backing me up here.Research published last week in the journal Nature reveals that women are genetically more complex than scientists ever imagined, while men remain the simple creatures they appear.''Alas,'' said one of the authors of the study, the Duke University genome expert Huntington Willard, ''genetically speaking, if you've met one man, you've met them all. We are, I hate to say it, predictable. You can't say that about women. Men and women are farther apart than we ever knew. It's not Mars or Venus. It's Mars or Venus, Pluto, Jupiter and who knows what other planets.''Women are not only more different from men than we knew. Women are more different from each other than we knew -- creatures of ''infinite variety,'' as Shakespeare wrote.''We poor men only have 45 chromosomes to do our work with because our 46th is the pathetic Y that has only a few genes which operate below the waist and above the knees,'' Dr. Willard observed. ''In contrast, we now know that women have the full 46 chromosomes that they're getting work from and the 46th is a second X that is working at levels greater than we knew.''Dr. Willard and his co-author, Laura Carrel, a molecular biologist at the Pennsylvania State University College of Medicine, think that their discovery may help explain why the behavior and traits of men and women are so different; they may be hard-wired in the brain, in addition to being hormonal or cultural.So is Lawrence Summers right after all? ''Only time will tell,'' Dr. Willard laughs.The researchers learned that a whopping 15 percent -- 200 to 300 -- of the genes on the second X chromosome in women, thought to be submissive and inert, lolling about on an evolutionary Victorian fainting couch, are active, giving women a significant increase in gene expression over men.As the Times science reporter Nicholas Wade, who is writing a book about human evolution and genetics, explained it to me: ''Women are mosaics, one could even say chimeras, in the sense that they are made up of two different kinds of cell. Whereas men are pure and uncomplicated, being made of just a single kind of cell throughout.''This means men's generalizations about women are correct, too. Women are inscrutable, changeable, crafty, idiosyncratic, a different species.''Women's chromosomes have more complexity, which men view as unpredictability,'' said David Page, a molecular biologist and expert on sex evolution at the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research in Cambridge, Mass.Known as Mr. Y, Dr. P calls himself ''the defender of the rotting Y chromosome.'' He's referring to studies showing that the Y chromosome has been shedding genes willy-nilly for millions of years and is now a fraction of the size of its partner, the X chromosome. ''The Y married up,'' he notes. ''The X married down.''Size matters, so some experts have suggested that in 10 million years or even much sooner -- 100,000 years -- men could disappear, taking Maxim magazine, March Madness and cold pizza in the morning with them.Dr. Page drolly conjures up a picture of the Y chromosome as ''a slovenly beast,'' sitting in his favorite armchair, surrounded by the litter of old fast food takeout boxes.''The Y wants to maintain himself but doesn't know how,'' he said. ''He's falling apart, like the guy who can't manage to get a doctor's appointment or can't clean up the house or apartment unless his wife does it.''I prefer to think of the Y as persevering and noble, not as the Rodney Dangerfield of the human genome.''Dr. Page says the Y -- a refuge throughout evolution for any gene that is good for males and/or bad for females -- has become ''a mirror, a metaphor, a blank slate on which you can write anything you want to think about males.'' It has inspired cartoon gene maps that show the belching gene, the inability-to-remember-birthdays-and-anniversaries gene, the fascination-with-spiders-and-reptiles gene, the selective-hearing-loss-''Huh'' gene, the inability-to-express-affection-on-the-phone gene.The discovery about women's superior gene expression may answer the age-old question about why men have trouble expressing themselves: because their genes do.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comOh my God, we really are in a theocracy.Are the Republicans so obsessed with maintaining control over all branches of government, and are the Democrats so emasculated about not having any power, that they are willing to turn the nation into a wholly owned subsidiary of the church?The more dogma-driven activists, self-perpetuating pols and ratings-crazed broadcast media prattle about ''faith,'' the less we honor the credo that a person's relationship with God should remain a private matter.As the Bush White House desperately maneuvers in Iraq to prevent the new government from being run according to the dictates of religious fundamentalists, it desperately maneuvers here to pander to religious fundamentalists who want to dictate how the government should be run.Maybe President Bush should spend less time preaching about spreading democracy around the world and more time worrying about our deteriorating democracy.Even some Republicans seemed appalled at this latest illustration of Nietzsche's observation that ''morality is the best of all devices for leading mankind by the nose.''As Christopher Shays, one of five House Republicans who voted against the bill to allow the Terri Schiavo case to be snatched from Florida state jurisdiction and moved to federal court, put it: ''This Republican Party of Lincoln has become a party of theocracy. There are going to be repercussions from this vote.''A CBS News poll yesterday found that 82 percent of the public was opposed to Congress and the president intervening in this case; 74 percent thought it was all about politics.The president, who couldn't be dragged outdoors to talk about the more than a hundred thousand people who died in the horrific tsunami, was willing to be dragged out of bed to sign a bill about one woman his base had fixated on. But with the new polls, the White House seemed to shrink back a bit.The scene on Capitol Hill this past week has been almost as absurdly macabre as the movie ''Weekend at Bernie's,'' with Tom DeLay and Bill Frist propping up between them this poor woman in a vegetative state to indulge their own political agendas. Mr. DeLay, the poster child for ethical abuse, wanted to show that he is still a favorite of conservatives. Dr. Frist thinks he can ace out Jeb Bush to be 44, even though he has become a laughingstock by trying to rediagnose Ms. Schiavo's condition by video.As one disgusted Times reader suggested in an e-mail: ''Americans ought to send Bill Frist their requests: 'Dear Dr. Frist: Please watch the enclosed video and tell us if that mole on my mother's cheek is cancer. Does she need surgery?'''Jeb, keeping up with the '08 competition, vainly tried to get Florida to declare Ms. Schiavo a ward of the state.Republicans easily abandon their cherished principles of individual privacy and states' rights when their personal ambitions come into play. The first time they snatched a case out of a Florida state court to give to a federal court, it was Bush v. Gore. This time, it's Bush v. Constitution.While Senate Democrats like Hillary Clinton, who are trying to curry favor with red staters, meekly allowed the shameful legislation to be enacted, at least some Floridian House members decided to put up a fight, though they knew they couldn't win.The president and his ideological partners don't believe in separation of powers. They just believe in their own power. First they tried to circumvent the Florida courts; now they're trying to pack the federal bench with trustworthy conservatives and even blow up the filibuster rule. But they may yet learn a lesson on checks and balances, as the federal courts rebuffed them in the Schiavo case.Mr. DeLay moved yesterday to file a friend of the court brief with the Supreme Court asking that Ms. Schiavo's feeding tube be restored while the federal court is deciding what to do. But as he exploits this one sad case, Mr. DeLay has voted to slash Medicaid by $15 billion, denying money to care for poor people in nursing homes, some on feeding tubes.Mr. DeLay made his personal stake clear at a conference last Friday organized by the Family Research Council, a conservative Christian group. He said that God had brought Terri Schiavo's struggle to the forefront ''to help elevate the visibility of what is going on in America.'' He defined that as ''attacks against the conservative movement, against me and against many others.''So it's not about her crisis at all. It's about his crisis.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comSome may mock the Vatican for waiting until everyone on earth has read ''The Da Vinci Code'' to denounce ''The Da Vinci Code.''I am not one of them. It's Easter, and I don't want to blot my catechism.It's a little late, now that the two-year-old thriller by Dan Brown is a publishing miracle -- with 25 million copies sold in 44 languages, a cascade of other books inspired by the novel and a movie with Tom Hanks set to start filming this spring -- for Cardinal Tarcisio Bertone to intone on a Vatican radio broadcast: ''Don't read and don't buy 'The Da Vinci Code.'''But when you think of the history of the Catholic Church, the Vatican is acting with lightning speed. It took the church more than 350 years to reverse its condemnation of Galileo. The Vatican only began an inquisition of the 16th-century Inquisition in 1998. It wasn't until the reign of Pope John Paul II that the Vatican apologized for the crimes of the Crusaders and offered contrition for the silence of Catholics in the Holocaust. The church has still not apologized for shameful dissembling by its hierarchy on the sex abuse scandal. And America's Catholic bishops only last week announced they were finally going to get serious about opposing the death penalty.The 70-year-old cardinal assigned by the Vatican to exorcise the success of the novel is the archbishop of Genoa, a former soccer commentator and a contender to succeed the ailing pope. ''There is a very real risk that many people who read it will believe that the fables it contains are true,'' he told Il Giornale.It evokes the Dan Quayle-Murphy Brown flap for a Vatican official to slam Dan Brown's fictional characters, but a former Vatican reporter explained it this way: ''The church is founded on a story that some people believe and some people don't, so the Vatican tends to get very threatened by other versions of that story, especially racier ones.''Mr. Brown's zippy version has Jesus and Mary Magdalene marrying and having children. This ''perverts the story of the Holy Grail, which most certainly does not refer to the descendants of Mary Magdalene,'' Cardinal Bertone said. ''It astonishes and worries me that so many people believe these lies.''The novelist is not the first one to conjure romantic sparks between the woman usually painted as what one writer calls ''the Jessica Rabbit of the Gospels'' and the eligible young Jewish carpenter and part-time miracle worker.For years, female historians and novelists have been making the case that Mr. Brown makes, that Mary Magdalene was framed and defamed, that the men who run Christianity obliterated her role as an influential apostle and reduced her to a metaphor for sexual guilt.The church refuses to allow women to be ordained as priests because there were no female apostles. So if Mary Magdalene was a madonna rather than a whore, the church loses its fig leaf of justification for male domination and exclusion.It's obvious that Vatican officials did not read to the end of Mr. Brown's novel or they never would have denounced it.(Caveat lector: If you have somehow missed reading the blockbuster or are one of the thrifty souls waiting for the paperback to finally come out, do not read further.)After whipping you into a feminist frenzy over the hidden agenda of the church's unjustly perpetuating itself as an all-male, all ''celibate'' institution -- precepts that have clearly led to some unnatural perversions and attracted a disproportionate number of priests fleeing sexual confusion -- Mr. Brown abruptly deflates you at the end, going along with the notion that women should stay silent and submissive, letting the men who run the church continue to run the church with men.The woman who is the descendant of Mary Magdalene and Jesus tells Robert Langdon, Mr. Brown's Harvard symbologist hero, that the secret saga of how the church smeared her ancestor as a slut and swindled all women out of serious roles in the church does not need to be aired. It can continue to remain a secret.''Her story is being told in art, music and books,'' the woman says, adding that things are gradually changing for women: ''We are beginning to sense the need to restore the sacred feminine.''No whistle is blown. No alarm is sounded. Talk about an anticlimax for a fantastic ride. As it turns out, Mr. Brown is not the tormentor of the Vatican, but an ally.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comLike the new Woody Allen movie, ''Melinda and Melinda,'' it is possible to view today's big story on the tremendous intelligence failures before the Iraq war as either comedy or tragedy, depending on how you look at it.For instance, on the comic side, The Times reported yesterday that administration officials were relieved that the new report by a presidential commission had ''found no evidence that political pressure from the White House or Pentagon contributed to the mistaken intelligence.''That's hilarious.As necessity is the mother of invention, political pressure was the father of conveniently botched intelligence.Dick Cheney and the neocons at the Pentagon started with the conclusion they wanted, then massaged and manipulated the intelligence to back up their wishful thinking.As The New Republic reported, Mr. Cheney lurked at the C.I.A. in the summer of 2002, an intimidating presence for young analysts. And Douglas Feith set up the Office of Special Plans at the Pentagon as a shadow intelligence agency to manufacture propaganda bolstering the administration's case.The Office of Special Plans turned to the con man Ahmad Chalabi to come up with the evidence they needed. The Iraqi National Congress obliged with information that has now been debunked as exaggerated or fabricated. One gem was the hard-drinking relative of a Chalabi aide, a secret source code-named Curveball, who claimed to verify the mobile weapons labs.Mr. Cheney and his ''Gestapo office,'' as Colin Powell called it, then shoehorned all their meshugas about Saddam's aluminum tubes, weapons labs, drones and Al Qaeda links into Mr. Powell's U.N. speech.The former secretary of state spent four days and three nights at the C.I.A. before making the presentation, trying to vet the material, because he knew that Mr. Cheney, who had an idée fixe about Saddam, was trying to tap into his credibility and use him as a battering ram.He told Germany's Stern magazine that he was ''furious and angry'' that he had been given bum information about Iraq's arsenal: ''Some of the information was wrong. I did not know this at the time.''The vice president and the neocons were in a fever to bypass the C.I.A. and conjure up a case to attack Saddam, even though George Tenet was panting to be of service. When Mr. Tenet put out the new National Intelligence Estimate on Oct. 2, 2002, nine days before the Senate vote on the war resolution and after our troops and aircraft carriers were getting into position for battle, there was one key change: suddenly the agency agreed with Mr. Cheney that Iraq was pursuing the atomic bomb.Charles Robb, the former senator and governor of Virginia, and Laurence Silberman, a hard-core conservative appeals court judge, headed the commission. Unlike Tom Kean, Judge Silberman held secret meetings; he made sure the unpleasantness wouldn't come up until Mr. Bush had won re-election.It is laughable that the report offers its most scorching criticism of the C.I.A. when the C.I.A. was simply doing what the White House and Pentagon wanted. Isn't that why Mr. Tenet was given the Medal of Freedom? (Freedom from facts.)The hawks don't want to learn any lessons here. If they had to do it again, they'd do it the same way. The imaginary weapons and Osama link were just a marketing tool and shiny distraction, something to keep the public from crying while they went to war for reasons unrelated to any nuclear threat.The 9/11 attacks gave the neocons an opening for their dreams of remaking the Middle East, and they drove the Third Infantry Division through it.The president planned to announce today that he would put into place many of the commission's recommendations, including an interagency center on proliferation designed to play down turf battles among intelligence agencies.As Michael Isikoff and Dan Klaidman reported in Newsweek, in the three and a half years since 9/11, the intelligence agencies still haven't learned how to share what they know. At the Terrorist Threat Integration Center, the Homeland Security guy complained he was frozen out by the F.B.I. and C.I.A.Like ''Melinda and Melinda,'' the other side of this wacky saga is deadly serious. There are, after all, more than 1,500 dead American soldiers, Al Qaeda terrorists on the loose and real nuclear-bomb programs in Iran and North Korea that we know nothing about. No laughs there.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comI had an editor once whose wife was in the Audubon Society. There were a lot of articles about birds in that newspaper.I had an editor once who loved fishing. There were a lot of articles about fish in that newspaper.Organizations organically respond to please the boss. Bosses naturally surround themselves with people who tell them what they want to hear.When King Lear's favorite daughter spoke frankly to him, and refused to fawn like her sisters, she was instantly banished. Insincerity pays.It is absurd to have yet another investigation into the chuckleheaded assessments on Saddam's phantom W.M.D. that intentionally skirts how the $40 billion-a-year intelligence was molded and manufactured to fit the ideological schemes of those running the White House and Pentagon.As the commission's co-chairman, Laurence Silberman, put it: ''Our executive order did not direct us to deal with the use of intelligence by policy makers, and all of us were agreed that that was not part of our inquiry.''Huh? That's like an investigation into steroids in baseball that looks only at the drug companies, not the players who muscled up.We don't need a 14-month inquiry producing 601 pages at a cost of $10 million to tell us the data on arms in Iraq was flawed. We know that. When we got over there, we didn't find any.This is the fourth exhaustive investigation that has not answered the basic question: How did the White House and Pentagon spin the information and why has no one gotten in trouble for it? If your kid lied and hid stuff from you to do something he thought would be great, then wouldn't admit it and blamed someone else, he'd be punished -- even if his adventure worked out all right for him.When the ''values'' president and his aides do it, they're rewarded. Condoleezza Rice was promoted to secretary of state. Stephen Hadley, Condi's old deputy, was promoted to national security adviser. Bob Joseph, a national security aide who helped shovel the uranium hooey into the State of the Union address, is becoming an under secretary of state. Paul Wolfowitz, who painted the takeover of Iraq as such a cakewalk that our troops went in without the proper armor or backup, will run the World Bank. George Tenet, who ran the C.I.A. when Al Qaeda attacked and when Saddam's mushroom cloud gained credibility, got the Medal of Freedom.Then the president appoints a compliant Democrat and a complicit conservative judge to head an inquiry set up to let the president off the hook.Please, no more pantomime investigations. We all know what happened. Dick Cheney and the neocons had a fever to sack Saddam. Mr. Cheney and Rummy persuaded W., ''the Man,'' that it was the manly thing to do. Everybody feigned a 9/11 connection. Ahmad Chalabi conned his neocon pals, thinking he could run Iraq if he gave the Bush administration the smoking gun it needed to sell the war.Suddenly Curveball appeared, the relative of an aide to Mr. Chalabi, to become the lone C.I.A. source with the news that Iraq was cooking up biological agents in mobile facilities hidden from arms inspectors and Western spies. Curveball's obviously sketchy assertions ended up in Mr. Tenet's October 2002 National Intelligence Estimate and Colin Powell's U.N. speech in February 2003, laying the groundwork for an invasion of Iraq.Curveball's information was used to justify the war even though it was clear Curveball was a goofball. As the commission report notes, a Defense Department employee at the C.I.A. met with him and ''was concerned by Curveball's apparent 'hangover' during their meeting'' and suspicious that Curveball spoke excellent English, even though the Foreign Service had told U.S. intelligence officials that Curveball did not speak English.By early 2001, the C.I.A. was receiving messages from our Foreign Service, reporting that Curveball was ''out of control'' and off the radar. A foreign intelligence service also warned the C.I.A. in April 2002 that it had ''doubts about Curveball's reliability'' and that elements of the tippling tipster's behavior ''strike us as typical of individuals we would normally assess as fabricators.''But Curveball's crazy assertions had traction because they were what the White House wanted to hear.The report warns the president to watch out for the ''headstrong'' intelligence agencies. If only the commission had concerned itself with headstrong officials at a higher level. Then its 601 pages would be worth reading.Thomas L. Friedman is on vacation.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comBefore, Republicans just scared other people. Now, they're starting to scare themselves.When Dick Cheney tells you you've gone too far, you know you're way over the edge.Last week, the vice president told The New York Post's editorial board that Tom DeLay should not have jumped ugly on the judges who refused to order that Terri Schiavo's feeding tube be reinserted. He said he would ''have problems'' with the DeLay plan to get revenge on the judges: ''I don't think that's appropriate.''Usually, the White House loves bullies. It embraces John Bolton, nominated as U.N. ambassador, even though, as The Times reports today, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee is reviewing allegations that Mr. Bolton misused intelligence and bullied subordinates to help buttress W.M.D. hokum when he was at State.But there's some skittishness in the party leadership about the Passion of the Tom, the fiery battle of the born-again Texan to show that he's being persecuted on ethics by a vast left-wing conspiracy. Some Republicans are wondering whether they need to pull a Trent Lott on Tom DeLay before he turns into Newt Gingrich, who led his party to the promised land but then had to be discarded when he became the petulant ''definer'' and ''arouser'' of civilization. Do they want Mr. DeLay careering around in Queeg style as they go into 2006?On Tuesday, Bill Frist joined Mr. Cheney in rejecting Mr. DeLay's call to punish and possibly impeach judges -- who are already an endangered species these days, with so much violence leveled against them. ''I believe we have a fair and independent judiciary today,'' Dr. Frist said. ''I respect that.''Of course, Dr. Frist and the White House still want to pack the federal courts with right-wing judges, but they don't want it to look as if they're doing it because Tom DeLay told them to or because of unhappiness at the Schiavo case.No matter how much Democrats may be caviling over the House Republicans' attempts to squelch the Ethics Committee before it goes after Mr. DeLay (the former exterminator who pushed to impeach Bill Clinton), privately they're rooting for Mr. DeLay to thrive. They're hoping to do in 2006 what the Republicans did in 1994, when Mr. Gingrich and his acolytes used Democratic arrogance and ethical lapses to seize the House.Mr. DeLay is seeking sanctuary in Rome at the pope's funeral, and he will hang on to the bitter end. He got thunderous applause from his House colleagues yesterday morning, showing once more that Mr. DeLay, the House majority leader, has a strong hold on the loyalty of those who have benefited from the largesse of his fat-cat friends and from his shrewdness in keeping them in the majority.''I think a lot of members think he's taking arrows for all of us,'' Representative Roy Blunt told the press yesterday, backing up Mr. DeLay's martyr complex.Mr. DeLay lashed out at the latest article questioning his ethics, calling it ''just another seedy attempt by the liberal media to embarrass me.'' Philip Shenon reported in The Times that Mr. DeLay's wife and daughter have been paid more than half a million dollars since 2001 by the DeLay political action and campaign committees.Republican family values.The political action committee said in a statement that the DeLay family members provided valuable services: ''Mrs. DeLay provides big picture, long-term strategic guidance and helps with personnel decisions.''Political wives are renowned for injecting themselves into the middle of their husbands' office politics at no charge; a lot of members would pay them to go away.The Washington Post also splashed Mr. DeLay on the front page with an article about a third DeLay trip under scrutiny: a six-day trip to Moscow in 1997 by Mr. DeLay was ''underwritten by business interests lobbying in support of the Russian government, according to four people with firsthand knowledge of the trip arrangements.''All the divisions that President Bush was able to bridge in 2004 are now bursting forth as different wings of his party joust. John Danforth, the former Republican senator and U.N. ambassador, wrote an Op-Ed piece in The Times last week saying that, on issues from stem cell research to Terri Schiavo, his party ''has gone so far in adopting a sectarian agenda that it has become the political extension of a religious movement.''When the Rev. Danforth, an Episcopal minister who prayed with Clarence Thomas when he was under attack by Anita Hill, says the party has gone too far, it's way over the edge.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comBaby boomers' almost comic fear of aging reminds me of that silent movie scene in which Harold Lloyd hangs precariously from the hand of a giant clock, literally pulling time from its moorings.Despite the boomers' zealous attempts to stop time -- with fitness and anti-aging products, with cosmetic enhancements by needle, laser and knife -- time has caught up.The deaths of iconic figures and the noisy debate over assisted suicide have brought boomers face to face with their nemesis. ''Suddenly,'' The New Republic observed, ''we are all speculating about the feeding tubes in our future.'' Boomers want to control mortality so they're looking at living wills, and legal and medical options.I've visited the future, and it isn't pretty.My mom fell and fractured her neck one night a couple of winters ago. She was sent to a nursing home to recuperate. It was the third circle of gloom. Residents sat around, zombie-like, or slowly maneuvered in wheelchairs or with walkers. I suddenly understood why all of my mom's friends who had gone into nursing homes had become listless and died soon after. The facility was depressing, with bad food and impersonal attendants who seemed inured to their surroundings.It seemed like the sort of place people checked into but not out of. My mom's hazel eyes were filled with dread, so I bought a sleeping bag at the nearest R.E.I. and slept on the floor beside her bed for four weeks.There were blizzards outside and lethargy inside. All through the night, Alzheimer's patients would moan: ''Help me! Why doesn't anyone come to help me?'' They were unable to remember the last time an attendant stopped by. After a while, there didn't seem much point in getting dressed. I put on one of my mom's extra-large flannel robes and some slippers and started shuffling around the nursing home. I felt like one of those cursed women in Grimm's fairy tales who turn into crones in a blink. Soon the residents began acting as if I were one of them, just one with better mobility. They would call out for me to fix them tea in the microwave -- ''Just Sweet 'N Low,'' one woman ordered briskly.One night an elderly woman asked if I would come into her room and dial her daughter's number for her. ''I haven't heard from her in so long,'' she fretted. I called the number and left a message on the answering machine: ''Your mother misses you.''As I hung up, the old woman looked up at me with big suspicious eyes. ''What are you doing in my room?'' she demanded in a hostile voice. She had forgotten me already.Most nights, I watched two sweet-looking old ladies sneak down the hall to purloin supplies at the nurses' station -- cat burglars heisting Depends.In my old life, I read glossy catalogs from Bliss Spa and Bergdorf's. Now I sat in the drab community room reading Dr. Leonard's ''America's Leading Discount Healthcare Catalogue,'' which promotes the notion of senior superheroes with vision-enhancing Eagle Eyes sunglasses; Sonic Earz, to amplify sounds up to 60 feet away; and Frankie Avalon's Zero Pain roll-on pain reliever.It was upsetting to see how many body parts could go wrong. For $12.99, you could get ''heel wraps,'' little slings to keep the cream on your heel cracks; for $4.99, a straightener for overlapping toes; for $12.99, a ''control panty'' to banish unflattering tummy bulge.I told my mom about the control panty. She looked intrigued. ''Who does it control?'' she wanted to know.Why was I fighting aging so hard? It would be so easy to succumb. I could stock up on everything I'd eventually need: extra-long easy-grip scissors to clip toenails; the ''button helper,'' a wire loop to help reach buttons; Toppik, the ''amazing 30-second hair transplant,'' which sprays the scalp with color-matched hair fibers; a ''Remember Me'' poem and photo mat for departed relatives, friends and pets; and the best seller ''Natural Cures 'They' Don't Want You to Know About.''Dr. Leonard's assumes seniors have a healthy interest in sex. It offers a device called an Eroscillator for women, with a guide from Dr. Ruth. And for men, there's an aerobics video featuring ''totally nude'' young women: ''Because you can see the naked, well-toned bodies of the female instructors, you can follow each exercise and see exactly how to achieve the precise muscle extension and position.'' Right.Once Mom was sprung, I quickly went back to fending off mortality, ordering the latest age-delaying moisture complexes from the Bliss catalog.But I know Dr. Leonard's is out there, waiting patiently for me. Not an Appointment in Samarra, but an Appointment with the Eroscillator.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comMy family, alas, must bear the cross of inventing modern lobbying.It was all the fault of my cousin, Peggy, an irresistible, dimpled Grace Kelly type who ensorcelled Tommy Corcoran -- against the wishes of Franklin Roosevelt.Tommy was the brainy young lawyer for F.D.R. who constructed much of the early New Deal with Ben Cohen and sold to Congress the economic safeguards that protected the little guy. The two became, as David McKean wrote in ''Peddling Influence: Thomas 'Tommy the Cork' Corcoran and the Birth of Modern Lobbying,'' ''perhaps the best legal team in the annals of American government.''Peggy Dowd and Tommy met in 1933 when she was sent to his office at the Reconstruction Finance Corporation. ''You're Irish,'' her boss told 22-year-old Peggy. ''Maybe you can handle him.'' He talked with a cigar in his mouth and barked orders, and went through secretaries quickly.In a scene straight out of a Jean Arthur movie, Peggy told her new boss: ''Take the cigar out of your mouth or I won't take dictation from you.''Tommy, shocked, obliged.She became the New Deal's amanuensis. Everyone was charmed by Peggy, who was bright and generous, except F.D.R. and Felix Frankfurter, who thought their protégé should not marry the daughter of an immigrant Washington mailman. Peggy told my mom that F.D.R. teasingly referred to her as ''our 'Gorgeous Hussy,''' the title of a 1936 Joan Crawford movie about a Washington innkeeper's daughter who had a notorious friendship with Andrew Jackson.Tommy asked Peggy to marry him, and arranged a meeting to introduce his bride to the president. Mr. McKean describes the awful scene that came next: ''Peggy bought a new dress and hat for the occasion, and she and Tommy arrived at the White House family quarters at the appointed time. But after they'd waited for well over two hours, Harry Hopkins came into the reception area to tell them that the president could not, in fact, see them. Corcoran was furious and later claimed that the incident contributed to his decision to leave public service.''Along with other superconnected superlawyers, like Abe Fortas and Clark Clifford, Tommy elevated lobbying to a lucrative gentleman's profession. Mr. McKean writes that the raffish Tommy might talk in code on the phone -- I heard a few of his cryptic lobbying calls when I worked summers at his law firm -- but never did anything illegal: ''If occasionally he skirted the edge of propriety, he made sure to leave no footprints.''When he was investigated -- and cleared -- by Congress in 1960 on suspicion of improperly lobbying the Federal Power Commission chairman for a rate increase on behalf of the Tennessee Gas Company, Tommy was unapologetic: ''I walked down the corridors of the Commission, and I have always walked down the corridors of the Commission -- in broad daylight with a brass band behind me.''It's a far cry from today's lobbying. Sleazoid lawmakers like Tom DeLay gulp down the graft from sleazoid lobbyists like Jack Abramoff, who took Mr. DeLay, the House majority leader, to play golf in Scotland in 2000 as part of a $70,000 trip with Mr. DeLay's wife and staff, and for a six-day ''fact finding'' trip to Moscow in 1997.If there are any ethics questions, Republicans helpfully gut the House Ethics Committee, while DeLay & Co. try to gut the New Deal.Before he became a $750-an-hour superlobbyist accused of defrauding Indian tribes of tens of millions of their gambling dollars and pitting them against one another to pay for lavish trips for congressmen, ''Casino Jack'' had never been a White House wise man or spent years in public service. He produced B movies like ''Red Scorpion'' and ''Red Scorpion 2.''Unlike the cultivated Tommy, who was a bit of a Robin Hood, taking care of lots of people who were down and out, Mr. Abramoff leeched off a group that's always gotten gypped and then wrote ugly e-mail deriding his Indian clients as ''monkeys'' and ''idiots.''Another lobbyist, Tongsun Park, a South Korean at the center of a Congressional bribery scandal in the 1970's known as Koreagate, blasted back from the past this week. Mr. Park has been charged with secretly collecting at least $2 million from Saddam Hussein for clandestine help setting up the corrupt U.N. oil-for-food program and carting away bags of cash from Iraq's diplomats in New York, partly to bribe a U.N. official.Not exactly broad daylight with a brass band. More like midnight in the sewer.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comIn the free fall of TV news, ABC's attempt to create a successor for Ted Koppel's ''Nightline'' will go down as one of the most hilariously embarrassing moments.One show tested recently, according to reports, was set in a nightclub. It had white tablecloths, candles, a jazz quintet, a live audience at little tables and -- this is not a joke -- faux fog.We've gone from the fog of war to the fog of news.The nightclub segments that were tested had Gen X hosts and guests, and red-blue debates on Michael Jackson, the Olsen twins' ''dumpster chic'' and ''mad as hell'' rants.ABC decided not to go with the smoke machine. Still, Ted Koppel -- who vowed last year to leave ''Nightline'' before he was forced to cover ''wet burka'' contests -- must be spinning in his country home.Les Moonves of CBS has said that with the sonorous era of Dan, Tom, Peter and Ted coming to an end, viewers are no longer interested in ''voice-of-God, single-anchor'' formats.But who knew they would prefer the voice of Frank? A ring-a-ding Sinatraesque ''one for my baby and one more for the road'' network voice?In Washington last week, Rupert Murdoch echoed Mr. Moonves in giving the American Society of Newspaper Editors some bad news about young people in the age of the Internet, blogging and cable news:''They don't want to rely on the morning paper for their up-to-date information. They don't want to rely on a god-like figure from above to tell them what's important. They certainly don't want news presented as gospel.''So media big shots are moving away from patriarchal, authoritarian voice-of-God figures, even as the Catholic Church and politics are moving toward patriarchal, authoritarian voice-of-God figures.The white smoke yesterday signaled that the Vatican thinks what it needs to bring it into modernity is the oldest pope since the 18th century: Joseph Ratzinger, a 78-year-old hidebound archconservative who ran the office that used to be called the Inquisition and who once belonged to Hitler Youth. For American Catholics -- especially women and Democratic pro-choice Catholic pols -- the cafeteria is officially closed. After all, Cardinal Ratzinger, nicknamed ''God's Rottweiler'' and ''the Enforcer,'' helped deny Communion rights to John Kerry and other Catholic politicians in the 2004 election.The only other job this pope would be qualified for is ''60 Minutes'' anchor.President Bush has also long acted as if he channeled the voice of God. And now Tom DeLay and Bill Frist are also pandering to the far-right-wing and evangelical Christians by implying that God speaks -- and acts -- through them, too.Mr. Bush's more subtle obeisance to the evangelical right is no longer enough. Puffed up with its electoral clout, the Christian right now wants politicians to genuflect openly.The doctor who would be president is down on both knees. He's happy to exploit religion by giving a video speech on a telecast next Sunday that will portray Democrats who block the president's judicial nominations as being ''against people of faith.''A flier for the Christian telecast, organized by the Family Research Council, shows a confused teenage boy with a Bible in one hand and a judge's gavel in the other. The text reads: ''The filibuster was once abused to protect racial bias, and it is now being used against people of faith.''The born-again Tom DeLay has been fighting his ethical woes by acting like a martyr for some time. Dr. Frist, by contrast, was not known for playing the religious card before. But he is clearly willing to turn himself over, lock, stock and barrel, if it will help him marginalize such Christian-right faves as Rick Santorum and Sam Brownback, and garner support from those who always vote because they see elections in terms of eternity.Even Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, a Bible-Belt Republican, seemed surprised by the brazen move by Dr. Frist, the Senate majority leader. He told Newsweek: ''Questioning a senator's motives in that way is a very dangerous precedent.''And, of course, the Democrats are apoplectic. ''I cannot imagine that God -- with everything he has or she has to worry about -- is going to take the time to debate the filibuster in heaven,'' Senator Richard Durbin of Illinois said.As they toy with less lofty multiple-anchor formats, the networks may be more open to women. But at the Vatican and in the Christian right's vanguard, we can be sure that the voice of God is not female.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comIt was a move so smooth and bold, accomplished with such backstage bureaucratic finesse, that it was worthy of Dick Cheney himself.The éminence grise who had long whispered in the ear of power and who had helped oversee the selection process ended up selecting himself. In Cheneyesque fashion, he searched far and wide for a pope by looking around the room and swiftly deciding he was the best man for the job.Just like Mr. Cheney, once the quintessentially deferential staff man with the Secret Service code name ''Back Seat,'' the self-effacing Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger has clambered over the back seat to seize the wheel (or Commonweal). Mr. Cheney played the tough cop to W.'s boyish, genial pol, just as Cardinal Ratzinger played the tough cop to John Paul's gentle soul.And just like the vice president, the new pope is a Jurassic archconservative who disdains the ''if it feels good do it'' culture and the revolutionary trends toward diversity and cultural openness since the 60's.The two leaders are a match -- absolutists who view the world in stark terms of good and evil, eager to prolong a patriarchal society that prohibits gay marriage and slices up pro-choice U.S. Democratic candidates.The two, from rural, conservative parts of their countries, want to turn back the clock and exorcise New Age silliness. Mr. Cheney wants to dismantle the New Deal and go back to 1937. Pope Benedict XVI wants to dismantle Vatican II and go back to 1397. As a scholar, his specialty was ''patristics,'' the study of the key thinkers in the first eight centuries of the church.They are both old hands at operating in secrecy and using the levers of power for ideological advantage. They want to enlist Catholics in the conservative cause, turning confession boxes into ballot boxes with the threat that a vote for a liberal Democrat could lead to eternal damnation.Unlike Ronald Reagan and John Paul II, the vice president and the new pope do not have large-scale charisma or sunny faces to soften their harsh ''my way or the highway'' policies. Their gloomy world outlooks and bullying roles earned them the nicknames Dr. No and Cardinal No. One is called Washington's Darth Vader, the other the Vatican's Darth Vader.W.'s Doberman and John Paul's ''God's Rottweiler,'' as the new pope was called, are both global enforcers with cult followings. Just as the vice president acted to solidify the view of America as a hyperpower, so the new pope views the Roman Catholic Church as the one true religion. He once branded other faiths as deficient.Both like to blame the media. Cardinal Ratzinger once accused the U.S. press of overplaying the sex abuse scandal to hurt the church and keep the story on the front pages.Dr. No and Cardinal No parted ways on the war -- though Cardinal Ratzinger did criticize the U.N. But they agree that stem cell research and cloning must be curtailed. Cardinal Ratzinger once called cloning ''more dangerous than weapons of mass destruction.''As fundamentalism marches on -- even Bill Gates seems to have caved to a preacher on gay rights legislation because of fear of a boycott -- U.S. conservatives are thrilled about the choice of Cardinal Ratzinger, hoping for an unholy alliance. They hope this pope -- who seems to want a smaller, purer church -- encourages a militant role for Catholic bishops and priests in the political process.Cardinal Ratzinger did not shrink from advising American bishops in the last presidential election on bringing Catholic elected officials to heel. He warned that Catholics who deliberately voted for a candidate because of a pro-choice position were guilty of cooperating in evil, and unworthy to receive communion. Vote Democratic and lose your soul. ''Panzerkardinal,'' as he was known, definitely isn't a man who could read Mario Cuomo's Notre Dame speech urging that pro-choice politicians be allowed in the tent and say, ''He's got a point.''The Republicans can build their majority by bringing strict Catholics and evangelicals -- once at odds -- together on what they call ''culture of life'' issues.But there's a risk, as with Tom DeLay, Dr. Bill Frist and other Republicans, that if the new pope is too heavy-handed and too fundamentalist, his approach may backfire.Moral absolutism is relative, after all. As Bruce Landesman, a philosophy professor at the University of Utah, pointed out in a letter to The Times: ''Those who hold 'liberal' views are not relativists. They simply disagree with the conservatives about what is right and wrong.''Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comWhy are they picking on poor John Bolton? Everyone knows the man is perfect for the United Nations job.For one thing, his raging-bull temperament is ideally suited to an organization steeped in global pettifoggers and oil-for-food pilferers.The uncombed, untethered Mr. Bolton is fabulously operatic -- the Naomi Campbell of the Bush administration, ready at a moment's notice to beat up on underlings.Who doesn't want to see Old Yeller chasing the Syrian ambassador down the hall, throwing a stapler at his head and biting at his ankles?Who doesn't want to see him foaming at the mouth -- yes, it will be hard to tell -- at the Cuban delegate over Castro's imaginary W.M.D.?Who doesn't want to see him mau-mauing the Iranian mullahs?Who doesn't want to see him once more misusing National Security Agency eavesdropping technology, this time to spy on Kofi and son?Who doesn't want to see him outrage North Korea by calling Kim Jong Il a fat, maniacal munchkin?Even if his suave statesmanship were not so perfectly suited to high-level diplomacy, Mr. Bolton should still get the job. A ruthless ogre who tried to fire intelligence analysts who disagreed with his attempts to stretch the truth on foreign weapons programs deserves to be rewarded as other Bush officials have been.After all, he was in sync with the approach of Condi Rice, Paul Wolfowitz, Stephen Hadley and Bob Joseph -- who were all up for big jobs after they torqued up intelligence to fit the White House's theological beliefs.Condi breezed into the secretary of state job, even after she helped Dick Cheney gin up the Iraq war, ignoring reports debunking the notion of Iraqi nuclear tubes, and even after she told Congress she'd shrugged at the Aug. 6, 2001, presidential daily brief headlined ''Bin Laden Determined to Attack Inside the United States.''Mr. Wolfowitz was eager to sell the war, ignoring predictions of insurgency and possible civil war. So he and Donald Rumsfeld left our troops so stretched and vulnerable that they were reduced to using cardboard cutouts to stand sentry, and to jury-rigging Humvees that had not been properly armored, resulting in many lost limbs and lives.So Mr. Wolfowitz now has the prestigious job of World Bank president.George Tenet presided over the two biggest intelligence failures in modern history. He slam-dunked a Medal of Freedom out of them.Just as Mr. Bolton and Mr. Cheney tried to shovel distortions into Colin Powell's U.N. speech, Mr. Hadley and Mr. Joseph put distortions into President Bush's State of the Union address.Dick Cheney intimidated C.I.A. analysts before the war. And he and President Bush let North Korea and Iran race ahead with their nuclear programs, and let Osama roam free, while they indulged their idée fixe on Iraq. Their reward? A second term.In the Bush 41 era, good manners and judiciousness were prized. In Bush 43's Washington, bristling and bullying are the cardinal virtues. Putting an ideological filter on reality is a good career move.Once more using 9/11 as a rationale, Karl Rove told USA Today that the terrorist attacks proved that officials should ''be contesting, not simply supinely receiving, information from security analysts.'' He also rejected a deal with Senate Democrats on judiciary nominations and defended the rip-out-their-eyeballs tactics of Mr. Bolton and Tom DeLay.Mr. DeLay, who makes Donald Rumsfeld seem shy, created what The Washington Post called ''an ethics-free zone'' in the capital by bullying the House ethics panel, and now he and Dick Cheney are trying to bully the judiciary. Mr. Cheney also defended Mr. Bolton against criticism from the Colin Powell camp.Colin Powell never got it: there's nothing wrong with a little abrasiveness to win global domination.We should give the Bush administration credit for not being hypocritical by supporting a mealy-mouthed, mewling conciliator along the lines of Jeanne Kirkpatrick. If John Bolton is unfairly denied a chance to ply his diplomatic talents at the U.N., maybe he can work for Bill Gates.After Mr. Gates shamefully backed down from supporting gay rights legislation -- a Washington State preacher had threatened to boycott the company -- Microsoft could use a feral muscleman to face down the evangelical bully.That's a job -- or an ankle -- Mr. Bolton could really sink his teeth into.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comThe Iraqis have thrown us another curveball.Ahmad Chalabi  convicted embezzler in Jordan, suspected Iranian spy, double-crosser of America, purveyor of phony war-instigating intelligence -- is the new acting Iraqi oil minister.Is that why we went to war, to put the oily in charge of the oil, to set the swindler who pretended to be Spartacus atop the ultimate gusher?Does anybody still think the path to war wasn't greased by oil?The neocons' con man had been paid millions by the U.S. to tell the Bushies what they wanted to hear on Iraqi W.M.D. A year ago, the State Department and factions in the Pentagon turned on him after he began bashing America and using Saddam's secret files to discredit his enemies.Right after the invasion, the charlatan was escorted into Iraq by U.S. troops and cultivated an axis of Americans, Iraqis and Iranians. He got a fancy house with layers of armed guards and pulled-down shades, and began helping himself to Iraqi assets. The U.S. occupation sicced the Iraqi police on his headquarters only after an Iraqi judge ordered thugs in the Chalabi posse arrested on suspicion of kidnapping, torture and theft.Newsweek revealed that the U.S. suspected Mr. Chalabi of leaking secret information about American war plans for Iraq to the Iranians before the invasion, and of perhaps leaking ''highly classified'' information to Iran that could ''get people killed'' if abused by the Iranians. Mr. Chalabi claimed the Iranians set him up.In August of last year, while he was at a cabin in the Iranian mountains, the Iraqis ordered him arrested on counterfeiting charges, which were later dropped for lack of evidence.Now, showing survival skills that make Tom DeLay look like a piker, the resourceful Thief of Baghdad has popped back up as one of the four deputy prime ministers and the interim cabinet minister controlling the one valuable commodity in that wasteland: the second-largest oil reserves after Saudi Arabia. He even has a DeLay-like talent for getting relatives on the payroll: a Chalabi nephew is the new finance minister.Anthony Cordesman, a Middle East expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, told Reuters that many Iraqis would consider the plum oil job for Mr. Chalabi ''putting a fox in charge of the henhouse.'' The choice, he added, ''is going to make it extremely easy for people to make charges about corruption.''Oil isn't on the front burner only in Iraq. Mr. Bush and Dick Cheney know that time is running out to pay back the Texas buddies who sent them here with an energy bill. So those two oilmen are frantically pushing one loaded with giveaways to the oil industry at a time when it's already raking in huge profits because of high gasoline prices.In Baghdad, we may wind up with a one-man Enron -- never underestimate the snaky charmer. And the draconian efforts of Mr. Chalabi and other Shiites in power to purge Baathists from the government will breathe fire into the insurgency.Mr. Bush wanted Iraq to have a democracy like ours. It's on its way, nearing an ethics-free zone where a corrupt official can hold sway and a theocracy can curb women's rights.Another big winner in the new Iraqi cabinet is Moktada al-Sadr, the Shiite cleric who scurried away like a rat across the desert after he led two armed uprisings and caused a lot of American and Iraqi troops to die. His political movement got three ministries -- health, transportation and civil society -- and Sadr allies will try to give the scofflaw cleric legal protections so he can slink back into a leadership role.Ayad Allawi, the Shiite who was supposed to keep the government secular and bring in Sunnis to blunt the insurgency, has been marginalized. That leaves the government to be ruled by men rooted in the sort of conservative Shiite religious politics that will not produce a new dawn of equality for Iraqi women.The new prime minister, Ibrahim al-Jaafari, is a devout Shiite from the Dawa Party. As John Burns wrote in The Times yesterday, the Dawa Party was ''fiercely anti-American during their exile years under Mr. Hussein, and Dawa was implicated by American intelligence in terrorist acts across the Middle East, including a 1983 bombing of the American Embassy in Kuwait.''The bad news: This is not an Iraqi government that will practice Athenian democracy or end the insurgency. The other bad news: If Dr. Jaafari falls, Ahmad Chalabi will be there to pick up the pieces.Op-Ed ColumnistI went out once with a guy who didn't care for his mother, partly because he felt she was not attractive enough. My brother Martin, on the other hand, tells our mom how proud he was when she picked him up from grade school because he thought she was the prettiest mother.And we've seen those studies showing that aesthetics is hard-wired in the brain -- that even babies have an innate sense of beauty, choosing to gaze longer at lovelier faces.So it shouldn't be surprising to learn parents have the same bias. Still, the headline yesterday in Science Times was jolting: ''Ugly Children May Get Parental Short Shrift.'' As Nicholas Bakalar wrote: ''Canadian researchers have made a startling assertion: parents take better care of pretty children than they do ugly ones.''Researchers at the University of Alberta observed that at the supermarket, less adorable tykes were more often allowed to engage in potentially dangerous activities -- like standing up in the shopping cart or wandering off. Good-looking children, especially boys, got more attention from their parents and were kept closer at hand.''When it came to buckling up, pretty and ugly children were treated in starkly different ways, with seat belt use increasing in direct proportion to attractiveness,'' the article said. ''When a woman was in charge, 4 percent of the homeliest children were strapped in, compared with 13.3 percent of the most attractive children.'' With fathers, it was even worse, ''with none of the least attractive children secured with seat belts, while 12.5 percent of the prettiest children were.''Haven't these parents heard of the ugly duckling? Do they read to pretty kids only about pretty ducklings?Even if you're skeptical about supermarket science, the story conjures up poignant images of Pugsley-looking rugrats toddling off, or flying through the air and crashing into the rotisserie chicken oven because they're not belted in.Dr. Andrew Harrel, the research team's leader, put the findings in evolutionary terms: pretty children represent a premium genetic legacy, so get top care. ''Like lots of animals,'' he said, ''we tend to parcel out our resources on the basis of value.''As Marilyn Monroe explained in ''Gentlemen Prefer Blondes'': ''Don't you know that a man being rich is like a girl being pretty? You wouldn't marry a girl just because she's pretty, but my goodness, doesn't it help?''A beauty bias against children seems so startling because you grow up thinking parents are the only ones who will give you unconditional love, not measure it out in coffee spoons based on your genetic luck -- which, after all, they're responsible for.But the world can be harsh. Surface matters more and more, and the world ignores Shakespeare's lesson from ''The Merchant of Venice'': ''Gilded tombs do worms infold.''An analysis published last month by the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis suggests that the good-looking get more money and promotions than average-looking schmoes.Quoting the economists Daniel Hamermesh and Jeff Biddle, the study notes that being tall, slender and attractive could be worth a ''beauty premium'' -- an extra 5 percent an hour -- while there is a ''plainness penalty'' of 9 percent in wages (after factoring out other issues).Researchers report that taller men are more likely to win in business and -- except for the hapless Al Gore and John Kerry -- get elected president. Correlating 16-year-olds' height with their later salaries shows beanstalks grow up to earn about $789 more a year for each extra inch of height.In his best seller ''Blink,'' Malcolm Gladwell did a survey of half the Fortune 500 C.E.O.'s, and found that (Jack Welch notwithstanding -- or notwithsitting) the average C.E.O., at 6 feet, is about 3 inches taller than the average American man.As Randy Newman sang, ''Short people got no reason to live.''Research also shows that obese women get 17 percent lower wages than women of average weight and that dishy professors get better evaluations from their students.There can be too much of a good thing. As Dan Ondrack, a professor at the University of Toronto, told The Toronto Star, there's a ''Boopsey'' effect -- if women are too gorgeous, people assume they are airheads.No one seems sure whether bosses discriminate against people because they're less attractive, or whether more attractive people develop more self-esteem and social finesse.But one thing's for sure: it's hard to develop self-esteem when you're hurtling out of the supermarket cart toward the rotisserie oven.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comI love chimeras.I've seen just about every werewolf, Dracula and mermaid movie ever made, I have a Medusa magnet on my refrigerator, and the Sphinx of Greek mythology is a role model for her lethal brand of mystery.So when chimeras reared up in science news, I grabbed my disintegrating copy of Edith Hamilton's ''Mythology'' to refresh my memory on the Chimera, the she-monster with a lion's head, a goat's body and a serpent's tail: ''A fearful creature, great and swift of foot and strong/Whose breath was flame unquenchable.''Bellerophon, ''a bold and beautiful young man'' on flying Pegasus, shot arrows down at the flaming monster and killed her.Chimeras with ''generally sinister powers,'' as Nicholas Wade wrote in The Times, seemed to be a lesson in ''the pre-Darwinian notion that species are fixed and penalties are severe'' for crossing boundaries.Chimeras got attention again in the mid-80's, Sharon Begley of The Wall Street Journal noted, when embryonic goat cells were merged with embryonic sheep cells to produce a ''geep,'' when a human-mouse chimera was born and when ''scientists took brain-to-be tissue from quail embryos and transplanted it into chicken embryos. Once hatched, the chicks made sounds like baby quails.''The U.S. Patent Office balked at an attempt last year to patent a ''humanzee,'' a human-chimp chimera. But as the Stanford University bioethicist Henry Greely told Ms. Begley: ''The centaur has left the barn.''Knowing that mixing up species in a Circean blender conjures up nightmarish images, the National Academy of Sciences addressed the matter last month -- stepping into the stem-cell vacuum left by the government and issuing research guidelines.While research on chimeras may be valuable, the guidelines, in a fit of ''Island of Dr. Moreau'' queasiness, suggested bans on inserting human embryonic stem cells into an early human embryo, apes or monkeys.The idea is to avoid animals with human sex cells or brain cells, Mr. Wade wrote. ''There is a remote possibility that an animal with eggs made of human cells could mate with an animal bearing human sperm. To avoid human conception in such circumstances, the academy says chimeric animals should not be allowed to mate,'' he explained. Human cells in an animal brain could also be a problem. As Janet Rowley, a University of Chicago biologist, told a White House ethics panel: ''All of us are aware of the concern that we're going to have a human brain in a mouse with a person saying, 'Let me out.'''Mary Shelley was right. Playing Creator is tricky -- even if you chase down your accidents with torches.President Bush's experiments in Afghanistan and Iraq created his own chimeras, by injecting feudal and tribal societies with the cells of democracy, and blending warring factions and sects. Some of the forces unleashed are promising; others are frightening.In a chilling classified report to Congress last week, Gen. Richard Myers, chairman of the Joint Chiefs, conceded that Iraq and Afghanistan operations had restricted the Pentagon's ability to handle other conflicts.That's an ominous admission in light of North Korea's rush toward nukes, which was spurred on by the Iraq invasion and North Korea's conviction that, in bargaining with Mr. Bush, real weapons trump imaginary -- or chimerical -- ones.The U.S. invasion also spawned a torture scandal, and its own chimeric (alas, not chimerical) blend of former enemies -- the Baathists and foreign jihadists -- with access to Iraqi weapons caches.The Republican Party is now a chimera, too, a mutant of old guard Republicans, who want government kept out of our lives, and evangelical Christians, who want government to legislate religion into our lives.But exploiting God for political ends has set off powerful, scary forces in America: a retreat on teaching evolution, most recently in Kansas; fights over sex education, even in the blue states and blue suburbs of Maryland; a demonizing of gays; and a fear of stem cell research, which could lead to more of a ''culture of life'' than keeping one vegetative woman hooked up to a feeding tube.Even as scientists issue rules on chimeras in labs, a spine-tingling he-monster with the power to drag us back into the pre-Darwinian dark ages is slouching around Washington. It's a fire-breathing creature with the head of W., the body of Bill Frist and the serpent tail of Tom DeLay.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comW. can't get no satisfaction on Iraq.There's an angry mother of a dead soldier camping outside his Crawford ranch, demanding to see a president who prefers his sympathy to be carefully choreographed.A new CNN-USA Today-Gallup poll shows that a majority of Americans now think that going to war was a mistake and that the war has made the U.S. more vulnerable to terrorism. So fighting them there means it's more likely we'll have to fight them here?Donald Rumsfeld acknowledged yesterday that sophisticated bombs were streaming over the border from Iran to Iraq.And the Rolling Stones have taken a rare break from sex odes to record an antiwar song called ''Sweet Neo Con,'' chiding Condi Rice and Mr. Bush. ''You call yourself a Christian; I call you a hypocrite,'' Mick Jagger sings.The N.F.L. put out a press release on Monday announcing that it's teaming up with the Stones and ABC to promote ''Monday Night Football.'' The flag-waving N.F.L. could still back out if there's pressure, but the mood seems to have shifted since Madonna chickened out of showing an antiwar music video in 2003. The White House used to be able to tamp down criticism by saying it hurt our troops, but more people are asking the White House to explain how it plans to stop our troops from getting hurt.Cindy Sheehan, a 48-year-old Californian with a knack for P.R., says she will camp out in the dusty heat near the ranch until she gets to tell Mr. Bush face to face that he must pull all U.S. troops out of Iraq. Her son, Casey, a 24-year-old Army specialist, was killed in a Sadr City ambush last year.The president met with her family two months after Casey's death. Capturing W.'s awkwardness in traversing the line between somber and joking, and his love of generic labels, Ms. Sheehan said that W. had referred to her as ''Mom'' throughout the meeting, and given her the sense that he did not know who her son was.The Bush team tried to discredit ''Mom'' by pointing reporters to an old article in which she sounded kinder to W. If only her husband were an undercover C.I.A. operative, the Bushies could out him. But even if they send out a squad of Swift Boat Moms for Truth, there will be a countering Falluja Moms for Truth.It's amazing that the White House does not have the elementary shrewdness to have Mr. Bush simply walk down the driveway and hear the woman out, or invite her in for a cup of tea. But W., who has spent nearly 20 percent of his presidency at his ranch, is burrowed into his five-week vacation and two-hour daily workouts. He may be in great shape, but Iraq sure isn't.It's hard to think of another president who lived in such meta-insulation. His rigidly controlled environment allows no chance encounters with anyone who disagrees. He never has to defend himself to anyone, and that is cognitively injurious. He's a populist who never meets people -- an ordinary guy who clears brush, and brush is the only thing he talks to. Mr. Bush hails Texas as a place where he can return to his roots. But is he mixing it up there with anyone besides Vulcans, Pioneers and Rangers?W.'s idea of consolation was to dispatch Stephen Hadley, the national security adviser, to talk to Ms. Sheehan, underscoring the inhumane humanitarianism of his foreign policy. Mr. Hadley is just a suit, one of the hard-line Unsweet Neo Cons who helped hype America into this war.It's getting harder for the president to hide from the human consequences of his actions and to control human sentiment about the war by pulling a curtain over the 1,835 troops killed in Iraq; the more than 13,000 wounded, many shorn of limbs; and the number of slain Iraqi civilians -- perhaps 25,000, or perhaps double or triple that. More people with impeccable credentials are coming forward to serve as a countervailing moral authority to challenge Mr. Bush.Paul Hackett, a Marine major who served in Iraq and criticized the president on his conduct of the war, narrowly lost last week when he ran for Congress as a Democrat in a Republican stronghold in Cincinnati. Newt Gingrich warned that the race should ''serve as a wake-up call to Republicans'' about 2006.Selectively humane, Mr. Bush justified his Iraq war by stressing the 9/11 losses. He emphasized the humanity of the Iraqis who desire freedom when his W.M.D. rationale vaporized.But his humanitarianism will remain inhumane as long as he fails to understand that the moral authority of parents who bury children killed in Iraq is absolute.Thomas L. Friedman is on vacation.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comPresident Bush has done so much for women. Not at home, of course.Women in jeans in America may have their rights eroded by an administration where faith trumps science, but women in burkas? The president can't talk enough about how important their rights are.And in the administration's diplomacy-free foreign policy, five of its top spokesmen on the Muslim world are women: Condi Rice; Laura Bush; Liz Cheney, No.2 in the Near East bureau of the State Department and head of the Middle East democracy project; Karen Hughes, the new under secretary of state for public diplomacy; and her deputy, Dina Powell.W. thinks so highly of Ms. Hughes, his longtime Texas political nanny, spinner, speechwriter and ghostwriter, that he put his Lima Green Bean, as he called her when she prodded him about the environment, in charge of the critical effort to salvage America's horrendous image in the Islamic world -- even though what she knows about Islam could fit in a lima green bean. Why get any Muslims involved in reaching out to Muslims? That would be so matchy.The real role for the newly minted ambassador hasn't been defined yet, but so far it looks as if Ms. Hughes's first priority will be to take her spinning skills, honed for W. in 2000 and 2004, to improve his image, and his policies' image, on a global scale.Just as she retooled Bush as ''a reformer with results'' and a ''compassionate conservative,'' Ms. Hughes plans to inundate Muslims with the four E's: ''engagement, exchanges, education and empowerment.''On Thursday, when Mr. Bush came out of his Crawford ranch with Ms. Rice -- it was odd, if refreshing, to see a secretary of state wearing lilac -- he once again justified the war in Iraq by talking about the treatment of women.The way to defeat our enemies' ''hateful ideology,'' he said, is to offer an ideology ''that says to young girls, you can succeed in your society, and you should have a chance to do so.'' He also said, ''Hopefully, the drafters of the constitution understand our strong belief that women ought to be treated equally in the Iraqi society.''Hopefully? Is that the best we can do for a country that we broke, own and are sacrificing young men and women every day to keep?Americans like it when the president talks up women's rights in Iraq and Afghanistan, so he does it often. It helped him sell the invasions of those two countries. But W. should stop listening to ''My Sharona'' on his iPod and start listening to their Sharia.The fundamentalist Taliban is recrudescing in Afghanistan, young girls in Iraq are afraid to leave their homes because there are so many kidnappings and rapes, and women's groups in Iraq are terrified that the new constitution will cut women's rights to a Saudiesque level.Some Shiite politicians are pushing to supplant the civil courts that have long governed marriage, divorce, child custody and inheritance with religious courts that are based on Sharia, or Islamic law. The New York Times reported that one of the crucial articles in various drafts of the constitution is: ''The followers of any sect or religion have the right to abide by their religion or sect in their personal affairs, and a law should organize this.''That little provision could jeopardize any chance for women's equality. Clerics running religious courts based on the Koran could legitimize polygamy, honor killings, stonings and public beheadings of women charged with adultery, and divorce by ''talaq'' -- where all a husband has to do is declare, ''I divorce thee,'' three times.Saddam repressed Islamic politics, so under him, Iraq was one of the most secular countries in the Middle East. It has become far more fundamentalist since the U.S. took over.The back-to-burka trend has been widely reported throughout Shiite-dominated southern Iraq, and young women activists told The Los Angeles Times that their mothers had more freedom in the 60's.Najla Ubeidi, a lawyer in the Iraqi Women's League, agreed: ''During the 1960's, there was a real belief in improving women's conditions. We could wear what we liked, go out when we liked, return home when we liked, and people would judge us by the way we behaved.''If W. liked exercising his mind as much as his body, he could see that his mission to modernize Muslim countries is backfiring on women. The most painless way for Muslim men to prove that they have not abandoned Arab culture and adopted Western ways is to tighten the burka.To us, the ''liberated'' but repressive Iraq is a paradox. To the women, it's a prison.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comHow could President Bush be cavorting around on a long vacation with American troops struggling with a spiraling crisis in Iraq?Wasn't he worried that his vacation activities might send a frivolous signal at a time when he had put so many young Americans in harm's way?''I'm determined that life goes on,'' Mr. Bush said stubbornly.That wasn't the son, believe it or not. It was the father -- 15 years ago. I was in Kennebunkport then to cover the first President Bush's frenetic attempts to relax while reporters were pressing him about how he could be taking a month to play around when he had started sending American troops to the Persian Gulf only three days before.On Saturday, the current President Bush was pressed about how he could be taking five weeks to ride bikes and nap and fish and clear brush even though his occupation of Iraq had become a fiasco. ''I think it's also important for me to go on with my life,'' W. said, ''to keep a balanced life.''Pressed about how he could ride his bike while refusing to see a grieving mom of a dead soldier who's camped outside his ranch, he added: ''So I'm mindful of what goes on around me. On the other hand, I'm also mindful that I've got a life to live and will do so.''Ah, the insensitivity of reporters who ask the President Bushes how they can expect to deal with Middle East fighting while they're off fishing.The first President Bush told us that he kept a telephone in his golf cart and his cigarette boat so he could easily stay on top of Saddam's invasion of Kuwait. But at least he seemed worried that he was sending the wrong signal, as his boating and golfing was juxtaposed on the news with footage of the frightened families of troops leaving for the Middle East.''I just don't like taking questions on serious matters on my vacation,'' the usually good-natured Bush senior barked at reporters on the golf course. ''So I hope you'll understand if I, when I'm recreating, will recreate.'' His hot-tempered oldest son, who was golfing with his father that day, was even more irritated. ''Hey! Hey!'' W. snapped at reporters asking questions on the first tee. ''Can't you wait until we finish hitting, at least?''Junior always had his priorities straight.As W.'s neighbors get in scraps with the antiwar forces coalescing around the ranch; as the Pentagon tries to rustle up updated armor for our soldiers, who are still sitting ducks in the third year of the war; as the Iraqi police we train keep getting blown up by terrorists, who come right back every time U.S. troops beat them up; as Shiites working on the Iraqi constitution conspire with Iran about turning Iraq into an Islamic state that represses women; and as Iraq hurtles toward a possible civil war, W. seems far more oblivious than his father was with his Persian Gulf crisis.This president is in a truly scary place in Iraq. Americans can't get out, or they risk turning the country into a terrorist haven that will make the old Afghanistan look like Cipriani's. Yet his war, which has not accomplished any of its purposes, swallows ever more American lives and inflames ever more Muslim hearts as W. reads a book about the history of salt and looks forward to his biking date with Lance Armstrong on Saturday.The son wanted to go into Iraq to best his daddy in the history books, by finishing what Bush senior started. He swept aside the warnings of Brent Scowcroft and Colin Powell and didn't bother to ask his father's advice. Now he is caught in the very trap his father said he feared: that America would get bogged down as ''an occupying power in a bitterly hostile land,'' facing a possibly ''barren'' outcome.It turns out that the people of Iraq have ethnic and religious identities, not a national identity. Shiites and Kurds want to suppress the Sunnis who once repressed them and break off into their own states, smashing the Bush model kitchen of democracy.At long last, a senior Bush official admits that administration officials can no longer cling to their own version of reality. ''We are in a process of absorbing the factors of the situation we're in and shedding the unreality that dominated at the beginning,'' the official told The Washington Post.They had better start absorbing and shedding a lot faster, before many more American kids die to create a pawn of Iran. And they had better tell the Boy in the Bubble, who continues to dwell in delusion, hailing the fights and delays on the Iraqi constitution as ''a tribute to democracy.''The president's pedaling as fast as he can, but he's going nowhere.Thomas L. Friedman is on vacation.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comRichard Nixon once gave me a lesson in the politics of war.Howell Raines, then the Washington bureau chief for The Times, took some reporters to meet Nixon right before the 1992 New Hampshire primary. The deposed president had requested that Howell bring along only reporters who were too young to have covered Watergate, so we tried to express an excess of Juvenalia spirit.Before the first vote of '92 was cast, Nixon laid out, state by state, how Bill Clinton, who was not even a sure bet for the Democratic nomination at that point, was going to defeat George Bush.If, Nixon said, Bill could keep a lid on Hillary (who had worked on the House Judiciary Committee looking into the Nixon impeachment), he'd have it made.''If the wife comes through as being too strong and too intelligent, it makes the husband look like a wimp,'' he said.In his jaundiced view, the first President Bush had squandered his best re-election card: if the Persian Gulf war had still been going on, Mr. Bush could have benefited from that.''We had a lot of success with that in 1972,'' Nixon told us, with that famously uneasy baring of teeth that passed for a smile.Was he actually admitting what all the paranoid liberals had been yelping about 20 years earlier -- that he had prolonged the Vietnam War so he could get re-elected?Bush Senior made some Republicans worry that he left Iraq too soon. Bush Junior is making some Republicans worry that he is staying in Iraq too long.''Any effort to explain Iraq as 'We are on track and making progress' is nonsense,'' Newt Gingrich told Adam Nagourney and David D. Kirkpatrick for a Times article on G.O.P. jitters about the shadow of Iraq over the midterm elections. ''The left has a constant drumbeat that this is Vietnam and a bottomless pit. The daily and weekly casualties leave people feeling that things aren't going well.''W. says he can't set a deadline to bring the troops home. But he started the war on an artificial deadline; he declared a ''Mission Accomplished'' end to major hostilities on an artificial deadline; he was inflexible on deadlines for handing over Iraqi sovereignty and holding elections. And he tried to force the Iraqis to produce a constitution on his deadline when the squabbling politicians of the ethnic and religious factions hadn't even reached consensus on little things like ''Do we want one country?''It isn't only the left that is invoking Vietnam. You know you're in trouble when Henry Kissinger gives you advice on how to exit a war.The man who won a Nobel Peace Prize for making a botched exit and a humiliating defeat look like a brilliant act of diplomacy wrote an op-ed article in The Washington Post drawing the analogy the White House dreads -- Iraq as Vietnam. He even included an unfavorable comparison: ''After the failure of Hanoi's Tet offensive, the guerrilla threat was substantially eliminated. Saigon and all other urban centers were far safer than major cities in Iraq are today.''He said Mr. Bush had only a few things to accomplish: train a real Iraqi Army that includes all religious and ethnic groups, make the Shiites stop hating the Sunnis and the Kurds stop hating everyone, and keep the Iranians from creating a theocratic dictatorship in Iraq.Oh, yeah, and a couple of other teensy little things: our troops have to defeat the vicious Iraq insurgency, and Mr. Bush needs to keep domestic support for the war.Domestic support is waning because the president remains too stubbornly ensconced in his fantasy world -- it's worse than Barbie in her dream house -- to reassure Americans that he has a plan to get out.As we approach the 2,000 mark of coffins coming home -- most of which the Pentagon hasn't let us see -- it doesn't even look like a war. It looks like a lot of kids being blown to smithereens by an invisible enemy.The mother of one of the 16 Ohio marines killed in a recent roadside explosion in western Iraq addressed the president from in front of her Cleveland home. ''We feel you either have to fight this war right or get out,'' Rosemary Palmer said.Tricky Dick suggested that he had a secret plan to get out of Vietnam. Bikey W. doesn't even have a secret plan, unless it's to vacation forever, and never again have to speed past in a motorcade to avoid those pesky antiwar protesters.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comW. vacationed so hard in Texas he got bushed. He needed a vacation from his vacation.The most rested president in American history headed West yesterday to get away from his Western getaway -- and the mushrooming Crawford Woodstock -- and spend a couple of days at the Tamarack Resort in the rural Idaho mountains.''I'm kind of hangin' loose, as they say,'' he told reporters.As The Financial Times noted, Mr. Bush is acting positively French in his love of le loafing, with 339 days at his ranch since he took office -- nearly a year out of his five. Most Americans, on the other hand, take fewer vacations than anyone else in the developed world (even the Japanese), averaging only 13 to 16 days off a year.W. didn't go alone, of course. Just as he took his beloved feather pillow on the road during his 2000 campaign, now he takes his beloved bike. An Air Force One steward tenderly unloaded W.'s $3,000 Trek Fuel mountain bike when they landed in Boise.Gas is guzzling toward $3 a gallon. U.S. troop casualties in Iraq are at their highest levels since the invasion. As Donald Rumsfeld conceded yesterday, ''The lethality, however, is up.'' Afghanistan's getting more dangerous, too. The defense secretary says he's raising troop levels in both places for coming elections.So our overextended troops must prepare for more forced rotations, while the president hangs loose.I mean, I like to exercise, but W. is psychopathic about it. He interviewed one potential Supreme Court nominee, Harvie Wilkinson III, by asking him how much he exercised. Last winter, Mr. Bush was obsessed with his love handles, telling people he was determined to get rid of seven pounds.Shouldn't the president worry more about body armor than body fat?Instead of calling in Karl Rove to ask him if he'd leaked, W. probably called him in to order him to the gym.The rest of us may be fixated on the depressing tableau in Iraq, where the U.S. seems to be delivering a fundamentalist Islamic state into the dirty hands of men like Ahmad Chalabi, who conned the neocons into pushing for war, and his ally Moktada al-Sadr, the Shiite cleric who started two armed uprisings against U.S. troops. It was his militiamen who ambushed Casey Sheehan's convoy in Sadr City.America has caved on Iraqi women's rights. In fact, the women's rights activists supported by George and Laura Bush may have to leave Iraq.But, as a former C.I.A. Middle East specialist, Reuel Marc Gerecht, said on ''Meet the Press,'' U.S. democracy in 1900 didn't let women vote. If Iraqi democracy resembled that, ''we'd all be thrilled,'' he said. ''I mean, women's social rights are not critical to the evolution of democracy.''Yesterday, the president hailed the constitution establishing an Islamic republic as ''an amazing process,'' and said it ''honors women's rights, the rights of minorities.'' Could he really think that? Or is he following the Vietnam model -- declaring victory so we can leave?The main point of writing a constitution was to move Sunnis into the mainstream and make them invested in the process, thereby removing the basis of the insurgency. But the Shiites and Kurds have frozen out the Sunnis, enhancing their resentment. So the insurgency is more likely to be inflamed than extinguished.For political reasons, the president has a history of silence on America's war dead. But he finally mentioned them on Monday because it became politically useful to use them as a rationale for war -- now that all the other rationales have gone up in smoke.''We owe them something,'' he told veterans in Salt Lake City (even though his administration tried to shortchange the veterans agency by $1.5 billion). ''We will finish the task that they gave their lives for.''What twisted logic: with no W.M.D., no link to 9/11 and no democracy, now we have to keep killing people and have our kids killed because so many of our kids have been killed already? Talk about a vicious circle: the killing keeps justifying itself.Just because the final reason the president came up with for invading Iraq -- to create a democracy with freedom of religion and minority rights -- has been dashed, why stop relaxing? W. is determined to stay the course on bike trails all over the West.This president has never had to pull all-nighters or work very hard, because Daddy's friends always gave him a boost when he flamed out. When was the last time Mr. Bush saw the clock strike midnight? At these prices, though, I guess he can't afford to burn the midnight oil.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com; Thomas L. Friedman is on vacation.W. has jumped the couch.Not fallen off the couch, as he did when he choked on that pretzel.According to UrbanDictionary.com, ''jump the couch'' has now become slang for ''a defining moment when you know someone has gone off the deep end. Inspired by Tom Cruise's recent behavior on 'Oprah.' Also see 'jump the shark.'''The former stateside National Guardsman who was sometimes M.I.A. jumped the shark by landing on that ''Mission Accomplished'' carrier. (With Tom Cruise cockiness.)Then, as president, he jumped the couch by pedaling through the guns of August -- the growing carnage and chaos in Iraq and Afghanistan.He did do a few minutes of work this month, calling a Shiite leader in Baghdad a few days ago to lobby him to reach a consensus with the Sunnis, so Iraq doesn't crack apart. But the Shiites and Kurds ignored the president and skewered the Sunnis.Iraq, it turns out, is the one branch of American government that the Republicans don't control.W. had a barbecue for the press on Thursday night. (If only the press had grilled him instead.) He mingled over catfish and potato salad with the reporters, who had to ride past Cindy Sheehan's antiwar encampment to get to the poolside party.Dan Froomkin wrote on the Washington Post Web site that many of the reporters ''fawned over Bush, following him around in packs every time he moved.'' W. chatted about sports and the twins, still oblivious to the cultural shift that is turning 2005 into 1968.As the news correspondent Dan Harris noted on ABC on Wednesday, the mood is much different now from what it was when the Dixie Chicks got pilloried for criticizing the president just before the war began.The No.1 music video requested on MTV is Green Day's antiwar song, ''Wake Me Up When September Ends,'' about the pain of soldiers and their families. On Sunday, Joan Baez sang peace anthems at Camp Casey, including ''Where Have All the Flowers Gone?'' The N.F.L. did not cancel its sponsorship of the Rolling Stones tour, even though the band has a new song critical of Mr. Bush and the war.Gary Hart began his Washington Post op-ed piece this week by quoting from an anti-Vietnam War song, ''Waist-deep in the Big Muddy, and the big fool said to push on.''The former campaign manager for George McGovern's antiwar campaign in 1972 wrote: ''We've stumbled into a hornet's nest. We've weakened ourselves at home and in the world. We are less secure today than before this war began. Who now has the courage to say this?''Anxiety is growing among politicians on both sides of the aisle. More and more Americans don't want to stay-the-course on stay-the-course.You'd think that by now, watching the meshugas in Iraq, the Bush crowd would have learned some lessons about twisting facts to suit ideology, and punishing those who try to tell the truth. But they're still behaving like Cinderella's evil stepsisters, who cut their feet to fit them into the glass slipper: butchering reality to make the fairy tale come out their way.Eric Lichtblau reported in The Times this week that the administration was dumping the highly respected Lawrence Greenfeld, appointed by President Bush in 2001 to head the Bureau of Justice Statistics, because he refused superiors' orders to delete from a press release an account of how black and Hispanic drivers were treated more aggressively by the police after traffic stops. The Justice Department study showed markedly higher rates of searches and use of force for black and Hispanic drivers, compared with white drivers.Fearing that the survey would give ammunition to members of Congress who object to using racial and ethnic data in terrorism and law enforcement investigations, Mr. Greenfeld's supervisors buried it online with no press release or briefing for Congress.Mr. Lichtblau wrote that when Mr. Greenfeld sent the planned press release to the office of his supervisor, Tracy Henke, then an acting assistant attorney general, the section on the treatment of black and Hispanic drivers was crossed out with a notation: ''Do we need this?'' Ms. Henke herself had added a note: ''Make the changes.''Like Condi Rice, Stephen Hadley, John Bolton and others who helped spin reality to suit political ends, Ms. Henke was rewarded by the president. She has been nominated for a senior post in the Homeland Security Department.I feel safer already.E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comThe president is working up a sweat, keeping that perfectly toned body perfectly toned. I slide past stone-faced men with earpieces and ask the president how it's going.''Good,'' she says, grinning. ''People ask me if there could really be a woman president and I say, Of course, it's the 21st century.''Geena Davis was shooting a rowing scene at the Potomac Boat House on Monday morning for her new ABC show, ''Commander-in-Chief,'' about the first woman president.Luckily, the first woman president is tall, a shade taller than W., so she's eyeball to eyeball with generals and ambassadors. And she's a redhead. Redheads, a recent study showed, have a higher tolerance for pain. In the show's premiere, a lot of pain is dished up for Ms. Davis's character, Mackenzie Allen, the vice president of a conservative president who keels over before the first hour is over.Nobody wants the vice president, a political independent, to be Madame President. Not the president, who tells her before he dies to resign so his ally, the archconservative speaker of the House played by Donald Sutherland, can get the job. Not the president's chief of staff. Not her sulky, sexy conservative teenage daughter. Even her supportive (and faithful) politico husband gets skittish after East Wing staffers begin calling him ''the first lady'' and arrange his meetings with the White House chef.Mr. Sutherland's Nathan Templeton condescendingly asks her, ''How many Islamic states do you think would follow the edicts of a woman?''''Well, not only that, Nathan,'' she replies sarcastically, ''but we have that whole 'once a month will she or won't she press the button' thing.''He laughs nastily. ''Well, in a couple years,'' he says, ''you're not gonna have to worry about that anymore.''The creator and writer, Rod Lurie, also had an embattled woman vice president in his 2000 movie ''The Contender.'' (He named his TV president and vice president Bridges and Allen; the stars playing those roles in 2000 were Jeff Bridges and Joan Allen.)He told me he modeled his female president not on Hillary Clinton but on Susan Lyne, the smart, elegant former president of ABC Entertainment who is chief executive at Martha Stewart Inc. He said he wanted someone ''of rather unimpeachable integrity, very kind, very calm.''As Geena Davis was bursting into the Oval Office, and the other TV president, Martin Sheen, was dropping in on Cindy Sheehan in Crawford, Hillary was plotting for real.Her political activism began with her 1969 Wellesley commencement speech, when she slapped back a Republican senator, Edward Brooke, for criticizing the students' Vietnam War protests. She praised ''that indispensable task of criticizing.''But now Hillary's voice is often pianissimo on the current hot issue: how to get out of Iraq. Once we made sure Saddam was armed against Iran. Now we may have to arm an Islamic protégé of Iran if we want to pull out.But Hillary's not playing the vocal peacenik this time -- she's the cagey hawk. She knows if she wants to be the first woman president, she can't have love beads in her jewelry box.She has defended her vote to authorize the president to wage war, even though it was apparent then that the administration was snookering the country. And she has argued for more troops in Iraq, knowing it sounds muscular but there's no support for it from the public -- or Rummy.She figures the liberals will stay with her while she scuttles to the center, even if they get angry when she's not out front on stopping the war or preserving abortion rights. No one knows how she'll vote on John Roberts, so this could be her own Sister Souljah moment -- will she break with the hard-line left on Judge Roberts?What Hillary has going for her is exhaustion. Exhaustion kicks in with any party in power for eight years, let alone one that tricked the country into war. And at some point, voters may be too exhausted to resist Hillary's relentless ambition any longer.But by hanging back and trimming her positions, by keeping her powder dry until a more politically advantageous time, she may miss the moment when Americans are looking for someone to emerge from her cowering party to articulate their anger about Iraq or their fear about a Supreme Court that will scale back women's rights and civil rights here, as Islamic courts do the same in Iraq.Hillary may get caught flat-footed. Or she may be right in betting that there's no need to do anything rash now, like leading.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.com; Thomas L. Friedman is on vacation.Stuff happens.And when you combine limited government with incompetent government, lethal stuff happens.America is once more plunged into a snake pit of anarchy, death, looting, raping, marauding thugs, suffering innocents, a shattered infrastructure, a gutted police force, insufficient troop levels and criminally negligent government planning. But this time it's happening in America.W. drove his budget-cutting Chevy to the levee, and it wasn't dry. Bye, bye, American lives. ''I don't think anyone anticipated the breach of the levees,'' he told Diane Sawyer.Shirt-sleeves rolled up, W. finally landed in Hell yesterday and chuckled about his wild boozing days in ''the great city'' of N'Awlins. He was clearly moved. ''You know, I'm going to fly out of here in a minute,'' he said on the runway at the New Orleans International Airport, ''but I want you to know that I'm not going to forget what I've seen.'' Out of the cameras' range, and avoided by W., was a convoy of thousands of sick and dying people, some sprawled on the floor or dumped on baggage carousels at a makeshift M*A*S*H unit inside the terminal.Why does this self-styled ''can do'' president always lapse into such lame ''who could have known?'' excuses.Who on earth could have known that Osama bin Laden wanted to attack us by flying planes into buildings? Any official who bothered to read the trellis of pre-9/11 intelligence briefs.Who on earth could have known that an American invasion of Iraq would spawn a brutal insurgency, terrorist recruiting boom and possible civil war? Any official who bothered to read the C.I.A.'s prewar reports.Who on earth could have known that New Orleans's sinking levees were at risk from a strong hurricane? Anybody who bothered to read the endless warnings over the years about the Big Easy's uneasy fishbowl.In June 2004, Walter Maestri, emergency management chief for Jefferson Parish, fretted to The Times-Picayune in New Orleans: ''It appears that the money has been moved in the president's budget to handle homeland security and the war in Iraq, and I suppose that's the price we pay. Nobody locally is happy that the levees can't be finished, and we are doing everything we can to make the case that this is a security issue for us.''Not only was the money depleted by the Bush folly in Iraq; 30 percent of the National Guard and about half its equipment are in Iraq.Ron Fournier of The Associated Press reported that the Army Corps of Engineers asked for $105 million for hurricane and flood programs in New Orleans last year. The White House carved it to about $40 million. But President Bush and Congress agreed to a $286.4 billion pork-filled highway bill with 6,000 pet projects, including a $231 million bridge for a small, uninhabited Alaskan island.Just last year, Federal Emergency Management Agency officials practiced how they would respond to a fake hurricane that caused floods and stranded New Orleans residents. Imagine the feeble FEMA's response to Katrina if they had not prepared.Michael Brown, the blithering idiot in charge of FEMA -- a job he trained for by running something called the International Arabian Horse Association -- admitted he didn't know until Thursday that there were 15,000 desperate, dehydrated, hungry, angry, dying victims of Katrina in the New Orleans Convention Center.Was he sacked instantly? No, our tone-deaf president hailed him in Mobile, Ala., yesterday: ''Brownie, you're doing a heck of a job.''It would be one thing if President Bush and his inner circle -- Dick Cheney was vacationing in Wyoming; Condi Rice was shoe shopping at Ferragamo's on Fifth Avenue and attended ''Spamalot'' before bloggers chased her back to Washington; and Andy Card was off in Maine -- lacked empathy but could get the job done. But it is a chilling lack of empathy combined with a stunning lack of efficiency that could make this administration implode.When the president and vice president rashly shook off our allies and our respect for international law to pursue a war built on lies, when they sanctioned torture, they shook the faith of the world in American ideals.When they were deaf for so long to the horrific misery and cries for help of the victims in New Orleans -- most of them poor and black, like those stuck at the back of the evacuation line yesterday while 700 guests and employees of the Hyatt Hotel were bused out first -- they shook the faith of all Americans in American ideals. And made us ashamed.Who are we if we can't take care of our own?Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comIt took a while, but the president finally figured out a response to the destruction of New Orleans.Later this week (no point rushing things) W. is dispatching Dick Cheney to the rancid lake that was a romantic city. The vice president has at long last lumbered back from a Wyoming vacation, and, reportedly, from shopping for a $2.9 million waterfront estate in St. Michael's, a retreat in the Chesapeake Bay where Rummy has a weekend home, where ''Wedding Crashers'' was filmed and where rich lobbyists hunt.Maybe Mr. Cheney is going down to New Orleans to hunt looters. Or to make sure that Halliburton's lucrative contract to rebuild the city is watertight. Or maybe, since former Senator John Breaux of Louisiana described the shattered parish as ''Baghdad under water,'' the vice president plans to take his pal Ahmad Chalabi along for a consultation on destroying minority rights.The water that breached the New Orleans levees and left a million people homeless and jobless has also breached the White House defenses. Reality has come flooding in. Since 9/11, the Bush administration has been remarkably successful at blowing off ''the reality-based community,'' as it derisively calls the press.But now, when W., Mr. Cheney, Laura, Rummy, Gen. Richard Myers, Michael Chertoff and the rest of the gang tell us everything's under control, our cities are safe, stay the course -- who believes them?This time we can actually see the bodies.As the water recedes, more and more decaying bodies will testify to the callous and stumblebum administration response to Katrina's rout of 90,000 square miles of the South.The Bush administration bungled the Iraq occupation, arrogantly throwing away State Department occupation plans and C.I.A. insurgency warnings. But the human toll of those mistakes has not been as viscerally evident because the White House pulled a curtain over the bodies: the president has avoided the funerals of soldiers, and the Pentagon has censored the coffins of the dead coming home and never acknowledges the number of Iraqi civilians killed.But this time, the bodies of those who might have been saved between Monday and Friday, when the president failed to rush the necessary resources to a disaster that his own general describes as ''biblical,'' or even send in the 82nd Airborne, are floating up in front of our eyes.New Orleans's literary lore and tourist lure was its fascination with the dead and undead, its lavish annual Halloween party, its famous above-ground cemeteries, its love of vampires and voodoo and zombies. But now that the city is decimated, reeking with unnecessary death and destruction, the restless spirits of New Orleans will haunt the White House.The administration's foreign policy is entirely constructed around American self-love -- the idea that the U.S. is superior, that we are the model everyone looks up to, that everyone in the world wants what we have.But when people around the world look at Iraq, they don't see freedom. They see chaos and sectarian hatred. And when they look at New Orleans, they see glaring incompetence and racial injustice, where the rich white people were saved and the poor black people were left to die hideous deaths. They see some conservatives blaming the poor for not saving themselves. So much for W.'s ''culture of life.''The president won re-election because he said that the war in Iraq and the Homeland Security Department would make us safer. Hogwash.W.'s 2004 convention was staged like ''The Magnificent Seven'' with the Republicans' swaggering tough guys -- from Rudy Giuliani to Arnold Schwarzenegger to John McCain -- riding in to save an embattled town.These were the steely-eyed gunslingers we needed to protect us, they said, not those sissified girlie-men Democrats. But now it turns out that W. can't save the town, not even from hurricane damage that everyone has been predicting for years, much less from unpredictable terrorists.His campaigns presented the arc of his life story as that of a man who stumbled around until he was 40, then found himself and developed a laserlike focus.But now that the people of New Orleans need an ark, we have to question the president's arc. He's stumbling in Iraq and he's stumbling on Katrina.Let's play the blame game: the man who benefited more than anyone in history from safety nets set up by family did not bother to provide one for those who lost their families.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comI understand that politicians are wont to put cronies and cupcakes on the payroll.I just wish they'd stop putting them on the Homeland Security payroll.Can't they stick their pals who failed at business in the Small Business Administration and their tomatoes over at the Oilseeds and Rice Bureau of the Ag Department?At least Bill Clinton knew not to stash his sweeties in jobs concerned with keeping the nation safe. Gennifer Flowers said that Mr. Clinton got her a $17,500 job in Arkansas in the state unemployment agency, though she was ranked ninth out of 11 applicants tested. And Monica Lewinsky's thong expertise led her to a job as an assistant to the Pentagon press officer.Gov. James McGreevey of New Jersey had to resign last year after acknowledging that he had elevated his patronage peccadillo, an Israeli poet named Golan Cipel, to be his special assistant on homeland security without even a background check or American citizenship. Mr. Cipel, however, was vastly qualified for his job compared with Michael Brown, who didn't know the difference between a tropical depression and an anxiety attack when President Bush charged him with life-and-death decisions.W. trusted Brownie simply because he was a friend of a friend. He was a college buddy of Joe Allbaugh, who worked as W.'s chief of staff when he was Texas governor and as his 2000 presidential campaign manager.It sounds more like a Vince Vaughn-Owen Wilson flick than the story of a man who was to be responsible for the fate of the Republic during the biggest natural disaster in our history. Brownie was a failed former lawyer with a degree from a semiaccredited law school, as The New Republic put it, when he moved to Colorado in 1991 to judge horse judges for the Arabian Horse Association.He was put out to pasture under pressure in 2001, leaving him free to join his pal Mr. Allbaugh at an eviscerated FEMA. Mr. Allbaugh decided to leave the top job at FEMA and become a lobbyist with clients like Halliburton when the agency was reorganized under Homeland Security, stripping it of authority. Why not, Mr. Allbaugh thought, just pass this obscure sinecure to his homeboy?Time magazine reported that Brownie's official bio described his only stint in emergency management as ''assistant city manager'' in Edmond, Okla. But a city official told Time that the FEMA chief had been ''an assistant to the city manager,'' which was ''more like an intern.''Ever since W. was his father's loyalty enforcer, his political decisions have been shaped more by loyalty than substance or competence. Mr. Bush never did warm up to his first secretary of state because Colin Powell rebuffed appeals to help out in the Tallahassee recount of 2000.The breakdown in management and communications was so execrable that the president learned about the 25,000 desperate, trapped people at the New Orleans convention center not from Brownie, who didn't know himself, but from a wire story carried into the Oval Office by an aide on Thursday, 24 hours after the victims had been pleading and crying for help on every channel. (Maybe tomorrow the aide will come in with a wire story, ''No W.M.D. in Iraq.'')''Getting truth on the ground in New Orleans was very difficult,'' a White House aide told The Times's Elisabeth Bumiller. Not if you had a TV.As Mexican troops arrived in Texas to help with Katrina refugees, Brownie was recalled to Washington, where he said he wanted to get ''a good Mexican meal and a stiff margarita.'' Yeah, it was hard to get any good étouffée in New Orleans given the E. coli. The president should find that little bullhorn from ground zero, put it right on Brownie's ear and yell at him to get the heck out of there.FEMA was a disaster waiting to happen, the minute a disaster struck. As The Washington Post reported Friday, five of the eight top FEMA officials were simply Bush loyalists and political operatives who ''came to their posts with virtually no experience in handling disasters.''While many see the hideous rescue failures as disaster apartheid, Barbara Bush and other Republicans have tried to look on the bright side for the victims. The Wall Street Journal reported that Representative Richard Baker of Baton Rouge was overheard telling lobbyists: ''We finally cleaned up public housing in New Orleans. We couldn't do it, but God did.''Even those who believe in intelligent design must surely agree that Brownie and Representative Baker weren't part of it.Op-Ed ColumnistI hate spending time in hospitals and nursing homes. I find them to be some of the most depressing places on earth.Maybe that's why the stories of the sick and elderly who died, 45 in a New Orleans hospital and 34 in St. Rita's nursing home in the devastated St. Bernard Parish outside New Orleans, haunt me so.You're already vulnerable and alone when suddenly you're beset by nature and betrayed by your government.At St. Rita's, 34 seniors fought to live with what little strength they had as the lights went out and the water rose over their legs, over their shoulders, over their mouths. As Gardiner Harris wrote in The Times, the failed defenses included a table nailed against a window and a couch pushed against a door.Several electric wheelchairs were gathered near the front entrance, maybe by patients who dreamed of evacuating. Their drowned bodies were found swollen and unrecognizable a week later, as Mr. Harris reported, ''draped over a wheelchair, wrapped in a shower curtain, lying on a floor in several inches of muck.''At Memorial Medical Center, victims also suffered in 100-degree heat and died, some while waiting to be rescued in the four days after Katrina hit.As Louisiana's death toll spiked to 423 yesterday, the state charged St. Rita's owners with multiple counts of negligent homicide, accusing them of not responding to warnings about the hurricane. ''In effect,'' State Attorney General Charles Foti Jr. said, ''I think that their inactions resulted in the death of these people.''President Bush continued to try to spin his own inaction yesterday, but he may finally have reached a patch of reality beyond spin. Now he's the one drowning, unable to rescue himself by patting small black children on the head during photo-ops and making scripted attempts to appear engaged. He can keep going back down there, as he will again on Thursday when he gives a televised speech to the nation, but he can never compensate for his tragic inattention during days when so many lives could have been saved.He made the ultimate sacrifice and admitted his administration had messed up, something he'd refused to do through all of the other screw-ups, from phantom W.M.D. and the torture at Abu Ghraib and Guantánamo to the miscalculations on the Iraq occupation and the insurgency, which will soon claim 2,000 young Americans.How many places will be in shambles by the time the Bush crew leaves office?Given that the Bush team has dealt with both gulf crises, Iraq and Katrina, with the same deadly mixture of arrogance and incompetence, and a refusal to face reality, it's frightening to think how it will handle the most demanding act of government domestic investment since the New Deal.Even though we know W. likes to be in his bubble with his feather pillow, the stories this week are breathtaking about the lengths the White House staff had to go to in order to capture Incurious George's attention.Newsweek reported that the reality of Katrina did not sink in for the president until days after the levees broke, turning New Orleans into a watery grave. It took a virtual intervention of his top aides to make W. watch the news about the worst natural disaster in a century. Dan Bartlett made a DVD of newscasts on the hurricane to show the president on Friday morning as he flew down to the Gulf Coast.The aides were scared to tell the isolated president that he should cut short his vacation by a couple of days, Newsweek said, because he can be ''cold and snappish in private.'' Mike Allen wrote in Time about one ''youngish aide'' who was so terrified about telling Mr. Bush he was wrong about something during the first term, he ''had dry heaves'' afterward.The president had to be truly zoned out not to jump at the word ''hurricane,'' given that he has always used his father's term as a reverse playbook and his father almost lost Florida in 1992 because of his slow-footed response to Hurricane Andrew. And W.'s chief of staff, Andy Card, was the White House transportation secretary the senior President Bush sent to the rescue after FEMA bungled that one.W. has said he prefers to get his information straight up from aides, rather than filtered through newspapers or newscasts. But he surrounds himself with weak sisters who don't have the nerve to break bad news to him, or ideologues with agendas that require warping reality or chuckleheaded cronies like Brownie.The president should stop haunting New Orleans, looking for that bullhorn moment. It's too late.Op-Ed ColumnistThe president, as he fondly recalled the other day, used to get well lit in New Orleans. Not any more.On Thursday night, Mr. Bush wanted to appear casually in charge as he waged his own Battle of New Orleans in Jackson Square. Instead, he looked as if he'd been dropped off by his folks in front of a eerie, blue-hued castle at Disney World. (Must be Sleeping Beauty's Castle, given the somnambulant pace of W.'s response to Katrina.)All Andrew Jackson's horses and all the Boy King's men could not put Humpty Dumpty together again. His gladiatorial walk across the darkened greensward, past a St. Louis Cathedral bathed in moon glow from White House klieg lights, just seemed to intensify the sense of an isolated, out-of-touch president clinging to hollow symbols as his disastrous disaster agency continues to flail.In a ruined city -- still largely without power, stinking with piles of garbage and still 40 percent submerged; where people are foraging in the miasma and muck for food, corpses and the sentimental detritus of their lives; and where unbearably sad stories continue to spill out about hordes of evacuees who lost their homes and patients who died in hospitals without either electricity or rescuers -- isn't it rather tasteless, not to mention a waste of energy, to haul in White House generators just to give the president a burnished skin tone and a prettified background?The slick White House TV production team was trying to salvage W.'s ''High Noon'' snap with some snazzy Hollywood-style lighting -- the same Reaganesque stagecraft they had provided when W. made a prime-time television address from Ellis Island on the first anniversary of the 9/11 attacks. On that occasion, Scott Sforza, a former ABC producer, and Bob DeServi, a former NBC cameraman and a lighting expert, rented three barges of giant Musco lights, the kind used for ''Monday Night Football'' and Rolling Stones concerts, floated them across New York Harbor and illuminated the Statue of Liberty as a backdrop for Mr. Bush.Before the presidential address, Mr. DeServi was surveying his handiwork in Jackson Square, crowing to reporters about his cathedral: ''Oh, it's heated up. It's going to print loud.''As Elisabeth Bumiller, the White House reporter for The Times, noted in a pool report, the image wizards had put up a large swath of military camouflage netting, held in place by bags of rocks and strung on poles, to hide the president from the deserted and desolate streets of the French Quarter ghost town.The president is still looking for a gauzy beam of unreality in New Orleans -- and in Iraq, where a violent rampage has spiked the three-day death tally to over 200.The Oedipal loop-de-loop of W. and Poppy grows ever loopier.With Karl Rove's help, Junior designed his presidency as a reverse of his father's. W. would succeed by studying Dad's failures and doing the opposite. But in a bizarre twist of filial fate, the son has stumbled so badly in areas where he tried to one-up Dad that he has ended up giving Dad a leg up in the history books.As Mark Twain said: ''When I was a boy of 14, my father was so ignorant I could hardly stand to have the old man around. But when I got to be 21, I was astonished at how much the old man had learned in seven years.''Of course, it's taken Junior only five years to learn how smart his old man was.His father made the ''mistake'' of not conquering and occupying Iraq because he had the silly idea that Iraqis would resent it. His father made the ''mistake'' of raising taxes, not cutting them, and overly obsessing about the federal deficit. And his father made the ''mistake'' of hewing to the center, making his base mad and losing his bid for re-election.Bush père did make a real mistake in responding slowly to Hurricane Andrew in 1992, but that blunder has been dwarfed by what the slothful son hath wrought. Because of his fatal tardiness, W. now has to literally promise the moon to fix New Orleans and the rest of the Gulf Coast, driving up the federal deficit and embarking on the biggest spending bonanza and government public works program since F.D.R.In his address from the French Quarter, the president sounded like such a spendthrift bleeding heart that he is terrifying the right more than his father ever did.Read my lips: By the time all this is over, people will be saying that Poppy was the true conservative in the family.Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: liberties@nytimes.comThe president won't be happy until he dons a yellow slicker and actually takes the place of Anderson Cooper, violently blown about by Rita as he talks into a camera lens lashed with water, hanging onto a mailbox as he's hit by a flying pig in a squall, sucked up by a waterspout in the eye of the storm over the Dry Tortugas.Then maybe he'll go back to the White House and do his job instead of running down to the Gulf Coast for silly disaster-ops every other day.There's nothing more pathetic than watching someone who's out of touch feign being in touch. On his fifth sodden pilgrimage of penitence to the devastation he took so long to comprehend, W. desperately tried to show concern. He said he had spent some ''quality time'' at a Chevron plant in Pascagoula and nattered about trash removal, infrastructure assessment teams and the ''can-do spirit.''''We look forward to hearing your vision so we can more better do our job,'' he said at a briefing in Gulfport, Miss., urging local officials to ''think bold,'' while they still need to think mold.Mr. Bush should stop posing in shirtsleeves and get back to the Oval Office. He has more hacks and cronies he's trying to put into important jobs, and he needs to ride herd on that.The announcement that a veterinarian, Norris Alderson, who has no experience on women's health issues, would head the F.D.A.'s Office of Women's Health ran into so much flak from appalled women that the F.D.A. may have already reneged on it. No morning-after pill, thanks to the antediluvian administration, but there may be hope for a morning-after horse pill.Mr. Bush made a frownie over Brownie, but didn't learn much. He's once more trying to appoint a nothingburger to a position of real consequence in homeland security. The choice of Julie Myers, a 36-year-old lawyer with virtually no immigration, customs or law enforcement experience, to head the roiling Immigration and Customs Enforcement Agency with its $4 billion budget and 22,000 staffers, has caused some alarm, according to The Washington Post.Ms. Myers's main credentials seem to be that she worked briefly for the semidisgraced homeland security director, Michael Chertoff, when he was at the Justice Department. She just married Mr. Chertoff's chief of staff, John Wood, and she's the niece of Gen. Richard Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.As a former associate for Ken Starr, the young woman does have impeachment experience, in case the forensic war on terrorism requires the analysis of stains on dresses.Julie makes Brownie look like Giuliani. I'll sleep better tonight, knowing that when she gets back from her honeymoon, Julie will be patrolling the frontier.As if the Veterinarian and the Niece were not bad enough, there was also the Accused. David Safavian, the White House procurement official involved in Katrina relief efforts, was arrested on Monday, accused by the F.B.I. of lying and obstructing a criminal investigation into the seamy case of ''Casino Jack'' Abramoff, the Republican operative who has broken new ground in giving lobbying a bad name. Democrats say the fact that Mr. Safavian's wife is a top lawyer for the Republican congressman who's leading the whitewash of the White House blundering on Katrina does not give them confidence.Just as he has stonewalled other inquiries, Mr. Bush is trying to paper over his Katrina mistakes by appointing his homeland security adviser, Frances Townsend, to investigate how the feds fumbled the response.Mr. Bush's ''Who's Your Daddy?'' bravura -- blowing off the world on global warming and the allies on the Iraq invasion -- has been slapped back by Mother Nature, which refuses to be fooled by spin.When Donald Rumsfeld came out yesterday to castigate the gloom-and-doomers and talk about the inroads American forces had made against terrorists in Afghanistan and Iraq, he could not so easily recast reality.In Afghanistan, the U.S.'s handpicked puppet president is still battling warlords and a revivified Taliban, and the export of poppies for the heroin trade is once more thriving.Iraq is worse, with more than 1,900 American troops killed. Five more died yesterday, as well as four security men connected to the U.S. embassy office in Mosul, all to fashion a theocratic-leaning regime aligned with Iran. In Basra, two journalists who have done work for The Times have been killed in the last two months.The more the president echoes his dad's ''Message: I care,'' the more the world hears ''Message: I can't.''Op-Ed ColumnistStormy was testy.He had put aside the guitar and packed his slicker.The First Weatherman was working hard, man, harder than he had in years, even spending nights away from home -- and Barney -- in strange places.And still the pesky press was painting him as a storm groupie, racing Rita to Texas just to score a windswept backdrop to recapture his image as protector.Stormy preened for the cameras at FEEBLE FEMA headquarters in Washington yesterday. On CNN, a bilious image of a hurricane spun next to his head. You could imagine the little hurricane trailing him through the rest of his presidency, like the storm cloud with a lightning bolt that always trailed Joe Btfsplk in ''Li'l Abner.''He said he was jetting to San Antonio to check out ''the prepositioned assets'' and then riding out the storm watching ''the interface'' between the military and state and local authorities at Northcom in Colorado.But David Gregory at NBC quizzed W. on what good he could really do in Texas: ''Might you get in the way, Mr. President?''Stormy didn't like that. ''One thing I won't do is get in the way,'' he snipped.Mr. Gregory, part of a newly amped-up press corps, followed up: ''Isn't there a risk of you and your entourage getting in the way?''Now Stormy let off a little high pressure. ''There will be no risk of me getting in the way, I promise you,'' he said dismissively.The smart aleck reporters didn't understand how crucial it was for the president to intertwine, inter alia, with the interfacers. So W. explained it again: ''See, Northcom is the main entity that interfaces -- that uses federal assets, federal troops, to interface with local and state government. I want to watch that relationship.''But soon the San Antonio leg of the trip was scotched amid fears that Stormy would really be interfering more than interfacing. And besides, the weather was too sunny there for poses in foul-weather gear.Stormy is like his dad, Desert Stormy. They both love wardrobe calls: cool costumes, sports outfits, presidential windbreakers, ''Top Gun'' get-ups, weather gear.But leadership is not a series of costume changes. The former Andover cheerleader has been too reliant on photo-ops, drop-bys and ''Mission Accomplished'' strut-bys, rather than a font of personal knowledge.What Katrina exposed was a president who -- remarkable as this may sound -- seemed bored after his re-election, just as Bill Clinton had drifted after his re-election. Before the Monica scandal broke, Mr. Clinton's aides had to beg him to call lawmakers on the Hill to support his own legislative agenda.Before the Katrina scandal, W. had lethargically wandered the country, lifelessly promoting his Social Security plan and an energy bill that did nothing to solve the energy crisis, and endlessly vacationing in Crawford.He campaigned as a strong daddy who would keep us safe, but then seemed lost when his daddy figure, Dick Cheney, kept vacationing as Katrina exposed a grotesque rescue apartheid in New Orleans.The more tuned-in W. is now, the more obvious it is that he tuned out as New Orleans drowned. There is a high cost for presidential learning curves.Hundreds of thousands of people died in Bosnia before Bill Clinton got it right in Kosovo. A lot of elderly hospital and nursing home patients died in New Orleans before W. could pay attention to Houston and Galveston.On Wednesday, Stormy tried to make one of his strained linkages, this time with Katrina and terror. The terrorists, he said, were ''the kind of people who look at Katrina and wish they had caused it,'' while he is the kind of person who looks at Katrina and tries to energize himself to deal with natural disasters by thinking, What if this had been done by terrorists?On Thursday, he tried to move past the image he had projected of a lost boy wandering alone in the storm, and stood at the Pentagon flanked by his war council, talking about how he was moving to ''develop a secure, safe democracy in Iraq.'' Unfortunately, the Saudi foreign minister was in town dropping a bomblet by saying that Iraq was going down the tubes, a judgment other Sunni Arab leaders had been conveying privately.After his Pentagon remarks, W. looked at his vice president for approval and received a proud, avuncular smile that said, ''You're the Man.''But before he chases any more wind tunnels, Stormy should heed the Bob Dylan line: ''You don't need a weatherman to know which way the wind blows.''Op-Ed ColumnistI can't wait to see what's next.Dick Cheney carpooling downtown with Brownie? Rummy Rollerblading down the bike path to the Pentagon? Condi huddling by a Watergate fireplace in a gray cardigan?Maybe now that our hydrocarbon president is the conservation president, he'll downgrade from Air Force One to a solar-powered Piper Cub as he continues to stalk the Gulf Coast towns and oil rigs like Banquo's ghost.The once disciplined and swaggering Bush administration has descended into slapstick, more comical even than having Clarence Thomas et al. sit in judgment as Anna Nicole Smith attempts to get more of the moolah of her late oil tycoon husband.We've got the clownish Brownie still on FEMA's payroll, giving advice on cleaning up the mess he made. ( Let's hope the White House is paying him only long enough to buy his good will, not to take any of his bad advice.)We've got two oilmen in the White House whose administration was built on urging us to consume and buy as much oil and energy as possible. Now they're suddenly urging us to conserve. (Since Mr. Cheney considers conservation a ''personal virtue,'' at least he'll get some virtue.)The president called on Americans to drive less, and told his staff members to turn off their computers at night, turn down the air-conditioning, form carpools and take the bus.At the same time, he set a fine example by wasting gazillions of gallons of fuel with all the planes and Secret Service vans and press motorcades and police escorts that follow him around every time he goes on one of his inane photo-ops from the Colorado bunker to what's left of the Mississippi Delta and the Bayou. He did his part by knocking off a few cars from his motorcade on his seventh trip to the gulf yesterday -- but if residents had hoped he'd bring them some water, they went thirsty.''Even so,'' as The Times's Elisabeth Bumiller wrote, ''security dictated that Mr. Bush's still-impressive caravan pick him up at the base of Air Force One in Lake Charles, La. -- and drop him off just yards away for a meeting with local officials at an airport terminal.''Noting that the Bush administration has proposed new fuel economy standards that critics say could make huge S.U.V.'s and pickups even more popular, Reuters published some arithmetic about the president's notorious fuel inefficiency.Air Force One costs $83,200 to fill up and more than $6,000 per hour to fly. Then there's the cost of helicopters and a 2006 Cadillac DTS limo that gets less than 22 miles per gallon.Karen Hughes, the Bush nanny who knows nothing about the Muslim world and yet is charged with selling the U.S. to it, wasted even more fuel this week flying to Saudi Arabia to tell women covered from head to toe in black how much she likes driving even though they can't.She knows so little about the Middle East that she looked taken aback when some Saudi women told her that just because they could not vote or drive did not mean that they felt they were treated unfairly.One thing Saudi women like even less than not having certain rights is to have hypocritical Americans patronize them.The moment when America should have used its influence to help Saudi women came on Nov. 6, 1990, as U.S. forces gathered in the kingdom to go to war in Iraq the first time. Inspired by the U.S. troops, including female soldiers, 47 women from the Saudi intelligentsia took the wheels from their brothers and husbands and drove until the police stopped them.They were branded ''whores'' and ''harlots'' by Saudi clerics, had their passports revoked, and were ostracized from society for a dozen years. Even their husbands suffered.The experience made them more angry at the U.S. than at their own rulers. They feel that the Bushes play up the repression of women in the Middle East when it suits their desire to bang the war drums, but do not care what happens to women once the ideological agenda has been achieved.They feel the administration and the American media have emphasized the repression of Saudi women post-9/11 as a way to demonize Saudi Arabia and paint Saudi men as bullies and terrorists.When Ms. Hughes goes to Saudi Arabia to introduce herself as ''a mom'' and to talk about Americans as people of faith, guzzling fuel all the way in a country getting flush selling us oil, I think we can consider it taxpayer money well spent.W. doesn't really need to worry about turning down the lights in the White House. The place is already totally in the dark.Op-Ed ColumnistPaul Wolfowitz is having fun.''It's fun to have the chance to be a retail politician again,'' he told Andrew Balls of The Financial Times on a recent trip to India. It was an economic odyssey designed to warm up his image by tipping off the press to record his shirt-sleeve visit to a slum and his street dancing with children in Andhra Pradesh.When the reporter noted that Mr. Wolfowitz's role as No.2 at the Pentagon must seem distant, he agreed, saying, ''Yes, it does seem like a long time ago.''A lot has changed for this architect of the Iraq war since he left the scene of the accident. Following the lead of that other woolly-headed war theoretician, Robert McNamara, Wolfie scuttled to the World Bank, where he changed the subject from bollixing up Iraq to fixing up Africa.Unlike the Powell maxim ''If you break it, you own it,'' the Wolfowitz philosophy is ''If you break it, walk away from it.''Where on earth are those who egged on the Iraq civil war? The neoconservatives have moved on to debates about China and Iran. Richard Perle has dropped out of sight, except to pop up, as he did at the American Israel Public Affairs Committee's annual meeting in May, to urge a military raid on Iran if it's ''on the verge of a nuclear weapon.''The president and his generals are still offering gauzy assessments of our fight against an insurgency that grows ever more vicious, and dishing out loopy justifications for the war.Before Mr. Bush was dragged out of Crawford this summer, he was making the case that we had to keep killing in Iraq to honor troops killed there. This week, Gen. Richard Myers offered more circular logic, warning that a U.S. defeat would invite another 9/11. The Bush administration used 9/11 as a pretext for invading Iraq and now says it can't leave for fear of spurring another 9/11.Wolfie and fellow hawks turned Iraq into a harbor for Al Qaeda with an invasion they justified by falsely calling Iraq a harbor for Al Qaeda. General Myers said that America couldn't leave and allow Al Qaeda to dominate Iraq because ''then in my view we would have lost, and the next 9/11 would be right around the corner, absolutely.''Here's the weirdest perversion: First Rummy, as President Reagan's Mideast envoy, was photographed with Saddam, supporting him in the war against Iran. Then Rummy and other hawks rushed the U.S. into war against Saddam and ended up turning Iraq over to Shiites intertwined with Iran. And now Richard Perle thinks we might have to bomb Iran.The president spent years saying that Al Qaeda was on the run, and Rummy spent years saying we just had to finish off a few Saddam ''dead enders.'' But four years after Mr. Bush promised to get ''the people who knocked these buildings down,'' they are finally talking about Al Qaeda as a threat again.Perhaps they have no choice, now that Al Qaeda has supposedly started its own weekly newscast on the Internet, ''The Voice of the Caliphate,'' with an anchorman wearing a ski mask and an ammunition belt, and props like a Koran and a rifle pointed at the camera. Its top story was joy over Katrina damage.Testifying before the Senate Armed Services Committee on Thursday, Gen. John Abizaid called Al Qaeda ''the main threat we face'' in Iraq, citing its 400 suicide bombers deployed worldwide. So, when W. says if we fight them there we won't have to fight them here, that's just nutty.Though the Bush gang has maintained that it would be hard for Al Qaeda to operate on the run, General Abizaid noted that the group is ''empowered by modern communications, expertly using the virtual world for planning, recruiting, fund-raising, indoctrination and exploiting the mass media'' to break the U.S. will and try to form a haven in Iraq.Al Qaeda is exploiting tribal tensions intensified by the bungled U.S. occupation. Mr. Wolfowitz's assumption that America could conquer Baghdad and install the Shiites at the expense of the Sunnis -- with bouquets thrown -- in a religious war that has been going on for centuries, was naïve and dangerous.The rest of us may be glued to the gruesome pileup of bodies in Iraq, but Wolfie has moved on. He told The Financial Times that he still thought the U.S. and the British did ''the right thing'' for ''the right reasons,'' and ''hopefully, it's going to turn out the right way.''He said that wherever he travels, from Burkina Faso to Bosnia, Iraq rarely comes up. How fortunate for him.Op-Ed ColumnistI hope President Bush doesn't have any more office wives tucked away in the White House.There are only so many supremely powerful jobs to give to women who are not qualified to get them.The West Wing is a parallel universe to TV's Wisteria Lane: instead of self-indulgent desperate housewives wary of sexy nannies, there are self-sacrificing, buttoned-up nannies serving as adoring work wives, catering to W.'s every political, legal and ego-affirming need.Maybe it's because his mom was not adoring enough, but more tart and prickly, even telling her son, the president, not to put his feet up on her coffee table. Or maybe it's because, as his wife says, his kinship with his mom gives him a desire to be around strong, ''very natural'' women. But W. loves being surrounded by tough women who steadfastly devote their entire lives to doting on him, like the vestal virgins guarding the sacred fire, serving as custodians for his values and watchdogs for his reputation.First he elevated Condi Rice to secretary of state, even though she had bungled her job as national security adviser, failing to bring a sense of urgency to warnings about terrorism aimed at America before 9/11, and acting more as an enabler than honest broker in the push to invade Iraq.But what were these limitations, considering the time the workaholic bachelorette logged at W.'s side in Crawford and at Camp David, coaching him on foreign affairs, talking sports with him, exercising with him, making him feel like the most thoughtful, farsighted he-man in the world?Then he elevated his longtime aide, speechwriter, memoir ghostwriter and cheerleader Karen Hughes to under secretary of state for public diplomacy, although it is exceedingly hard for the 6-foot Texan to try and spin a billion Muslims whom she doesn't understand the first thing about.But who cares about her lack of expertise in such a critical job, as long as the workaholic loyalist continues to make her old boss feel like the most thoughtful, farsighted he-man in the world?And now he has nominated his White House counsel and former personal lawyer, Harriet Miers, to a crucial swing spot on the Supreme Court. The stolid Texan, called ''Harry'' by some old friends, is a bachelorette who was known for working long hours, sometimes 16-hour days, and was a frequent guest at Camp David and the Crawford ranch, where she helped W. clear brush.Like Ms. Hughes and Laura Bush, she's a graduate of Southern Methodist, and she has always been there for W. In 1998, during his re-election race for governor, Harry handled the first questions about whether Mr. Bush had received favorable treatment to get into the Texas Air National Guard to avoid the draft. Though the former Democrat once gave a grand to Al Gore in '88, she passed the loyalty test for W. during the Bush v. Gore standoff in 2000, when she recruited conservative lawyers to work for the Bush scion in Tallahassee.But who cares whether she has no judicial experience, and that no one knows what she believes or how she would rule from a bench she's never been behind, as long as the reason her views are so mysterious is that she's subordinated them to W.'s, making him feel like the most thoughtful, farsighted he-man in the world?David Frum, the former White House speechwriter and conservative commentator, reported on his blog that Ms. Miers once told him that W. was the most brilliant man she knew.Bushie and Harriet share the same born-again Christian faith, which they came to in midlife, deciding to adopt Jesus Christ as their saviors. The Washington Post reported that she tithes to the Valley View Christian Church in Dallas, ''where anti-abortion literature is sometimes distributed and tapes from the conservative group Focus on the Family are sometimes screened,'' and where, when she returns, Ms. Miers asks well-wishers to pray for her and the president.Born Catholic, she switched to evangelical Christianity in her mid-30's and began to identify more with the Republicans than the Democrats, The Times reports today; she joined the missions committee of her church, which opposed legalized abortion, and one former political associate said that Ms. Miers told her she had been in favor of a woman's right to have an abortion when she was younger, but that her views hardened against abortion once she became born again.W. is asking for a triple leap of faith. He has faith in Ms. Miers as his lawyer and as a woman who shares his faith. And we're expected to have faith in his faith and her faith, and her opinions that derive from her faith that could change the balance of the court and affect women's rights for the next generation.That's a little bit too much faith, isn't it?Op-Ed ColumnistConservatives may consider Harriet Miers the last straw.But what will Harriet Miers consider the last straw with conservatives?Maybe it will be Bork Borking her.The old Supreme Court nominee reject rejected the new Supreme Court nominee, calling her ''a disaster on every level'' and ''a slap in the face'' to conservatives. Robert Bork complained to Tucker Carlson on MSNBC last night that Ms. Miers had ''no experience with constitutional law whatever,'' that it was wrong for W. to choose a justice simply to have a woman's perspective, and that conservative reaction veered between ''disapproval and outrage.''WHAM! BLAM! POW!Way to crack the gal right across the kisser, when she's already on the ropes from so much conservative wailing and gnashing of teeth.Senator Sam Brownback suggested it would be futile for the ''very decent lady,'' as he dismissively called her, to compete with John Roberts's masterly performance because that would be like ''following Elvis.''Pat Buchanan told Keith Olbermann that conservatives were ''agonized,'' ''depressed'' and ''virtually heartbroken,'' and Charles Krauthammer wrote: ''If Harriet Miers were not a crony of the president of the United States, her nomination to the Supreme Court would be a joke, as it would have occurred to no one else to nominate her.'' Ouch.Conservatives are shocked to discover that President Bush has been stuffing his administration with cronies and mediocrities in important places? If Ms. Miers were a sworn foe of Roe v. Wade and an ardent advocate of originalism in constitutional jurisprudence, would the same conservatives be so sick about her qualifications? Clarence Thomas, after all, was anything but a leading light of American jurisprudence.The New Republic this week chooses the biggest 15 hacks in the Bush administration, noting that ''no administration has etched the principles of hackocracy into its governing philosophy as deeply as this one.'' Ms. Miers wins at No.1.W.'s case for her elevation is their closeness, because she is, as Alexander Hamilton put it, one of the ''obsequious instruments of his pleasure.''But there is some sign, at least, that there are limits to cronyism, even for the Bush administration. The president had nominated Timothy Flanigan to be deputy attorney general, a job where he would oversee all U.S. attorneys, the criminal division of Justice and the F.B.I. His qualification for this was a stint as Alberto Gonzales's deputy White House counsel, where he helped write the torture memos. In Congressional testimony at one point, he said that waterboarding was a good thing, because it doesn't leave visible or permanent marks. After his White House stint, Mr. Flanigan was a senior executive at Tyco International, where his main contribution was hiring Jack Abramoff, the Republican influence peddler, to protect Tyco's offshore tax shelters. Yesterday, Mr. Flanigan withdrew amid growing questions.The right is right about Ms. Miers's insufficiency to join the Brethren, even if the right is cynical. Actually, there's a lot of cynicism in the Miers affair. Those on the left are perfectly happy to look away from mediocrity because it is the lesser of two evils, because they were spared the nightmare of a reactionary maniac.W. is so loath to leave his little bubble -- where caretakers tell him how brilliant and bold he is -- that he keeps selecting the people in charge of the selection committees. It's just so much easier to choose a sycophant who's already in the room than to create one from scratch.He used to disdain pointy-headed liberals from Yale, but now he's angry at pointy-headed conservatives demanding some sort of genius for the Supreme Court, rather than a den mother who did all of W.'s legal wet work and who prefers John Grisham to Leo Strauss.While the Bushies have been trying to reassure the right that W. knows Harry's heart, that she's a good Christian church lady who will vote in a way that will please them, Harry is probably working herself up to a good grudge against all those meanies who are savaging her as a lightweight apple polisher. Imagine! After she rechristened herself midlife as born again and Republican for them.Even if she was going to be a loyal conservative jurist before, why should she be now, after all the loathsome things they've said?The old maxim goes that a neoconservative is a liberal who got mugged by reality. But if you're a conservative mugged by conservatives, neo and paleo, it might have the opposite effect and turn you into  David Souter!!!!Op-Ed ColumnistW. was the best Harry ever had.''You are the best Governor ever -- deserving of great respect!'' gushed Harriet Miers, then the Texas Lottery chief, to George W. Bush in 1997. The belated birthday card she sent her boss had a sheepishly eager puppy poking his head up and a poem that read: ''This is the wish/That should have been sent/Before your birthday/Came and went.''According to a cache of mash notes released by the Texas State Library and Archives Commission in response to formal requests from The Times and other news organizations, Ms. Miers also told W. that he was ''cool'' and ''the best!''; that he and Laura were ''the greatest''; that Texas was ''in great hands''; and that the governor should ''keep up the great work. Texas is blessed.''Since there is no breathtaking Miers judicial record to pore over, I was eager to read more breathless Miers missives to a president she describes as the most brilliant man she has ever met. How could I get the notes from the White House, given how opposed Mr. Bush is to leaks? I called Scooter and Karl and they sent the secret documents right over.August 2001 -- ''Thank you so much for letting me bundle up and drag away the brush that you cut down today. And if I might add, Sir, I've never seen a man wield the nippers so judiciously. It was awesome! You are the best brush cutter ever!!''September 2001 --  ''I found out today that you handed down a decision for the White House mess to offer three different kinds of jelly with its P.B.&J. sandwiches. Sweet!! As you know, I'm the only member of the staff who eats three meals a day in the mess. Now I get to have a different type of jelly at every meal! The mess is blessed to have a president who cares so much. I know I'm probably just flattering myself, but I like to think that you are thinking of me, also. (Smile.)''P.S. Can you believe Condi cares more about W.M.D.'s than P.B.&J.'s?''April 2002 --  ''I was worried that it could go unstated in the rush of business around here, but I just wanted to pause and say how amazing it is that, after doing so much for the American people already, you keep showing up for work most days. We have to come, but you choose to. You're the hardest-working president ever!!''October 2002 -- ''I'm not sure Condi has made the time to thank you herself, so I just wanted to say how much we appreciated the tickets to 'Madame Butterfly' on Saturday night. I wore my long black robe -- I mean, opera cape. I just wish it had had that song from 'The Sound of Music' -- I know you love it, too -- 'Cream-colored ponies and crisp apple strudels. ' You're one of my favorite things, sir!''January 2003 -- ''Just a quick note to say how cool it is that you picked Brownie to head FEMA. There's nothing like having someone you know and trust in a top job. Your gut is the best judge ever!!''April 2004 -- ''There is no other president who would have had the courage to allow torture, dude! (It's only too bad that Abu Ghraib rules out Alberto's chances of getting on the Supreme Court.) You are the best torturer ever!! xo, H.''June 2005 -- ''Make sure you take a good, long vacation this summer! Last year, you only took two weeks. You are pushing yourself way too hard, Sir!!''August 2005 -- ''I've half a mind to come down there myself and chase that witch, Cindy Sheehan, off your property with an injunction!! Yours, with you in Christ, Harriet.''September 2005 -- ''In all this fuss about that bad-girl buttinsky Katrina, no one else seems to have noticed -- not even Karen -- that you've achieved your bold vision of losing that seven pounds. That extra week of mountain biking was so much more important than people realize. You're the most chiseled commander in chief ever, and the most rad guitar player ever!!''October 2005 -- ''How can I thank you, Sir? I never, ever expected the Supreme Court. Phat! I hope Clarence doesn't make me watch 'Debbie Does Dallas' again. That movie is so anti-Texas! I miss you already!!''But now I will be able to serve your interests -- and those of your family -- forever and ever. If there's another recount you need help with, count on me. They say I don't have experience, but I've had the experience of polishing the boots of the wisest ruler since Solomon. I may not know stare decisis, but I know when to be starry-eyed. I await your instructions, Master.''Op-Ed ColumnistPresident Bush started his weekend early. He decided to leave for Camp David at 2 p.m. yesterday.Can you blame him?The White House has lost its mind -- and its survival instincts. The monomaniacal special prosecutor is moving in for the kill. Republicans are covered in mud. And we may be only moments away from another Newsweek cover on another President Bush headlined ''The Wimp Factor.''W.'s political career was structured to ensure that he would never suffer his father's problems by seeming weak or wobbly on conservatism. Everything would be about projecting strength and protecting the base.But the reverse playbook got washed away with Katrina, when Karl Rove and W. did not jump to attention at the word hurricane. W. ended up with a job approval rating of 2 percent among African-Americans, according to a new NBC/Wall Street Journal poll. He missed the golden hour, as it's called in combat medicine, the precious time when acting fast may save those in jeopardy.W.'s presidency has become branded with rushing into one place too fast and not rushing into another fast enough.Astonishingly, with the choice of Harriet Miers, this Bush has ended up exactly where the last Bush ended up: giving affirmative action for the Supreme Court a bad name and then angering conservatives, who call him a mollycoddle.Just as the father clearly missed the wily strategist Lee Atwater after he got a fatal disease, so the son clearly misses Mr. Rove, the Atwater protégé, who has been distracted by kidney stones and repeated trips to testify to the grand jury looking into the outing of Valerie Plame.Lyndon Johnson said the two things that make politicians behave more stupidly than anything else are sex and envy. You might add one more: proximity. I always think men are more prone to get seduced by proximity into making unwise choices. They tend to be a bit lazy. They'll grab the closest doughnut off the platter. Like Jude Law and the Nanny.It was Monica Lewinsky's proximity that caused Bill Clinton to forget the dignity of his office. It was Harriet Miers's proximity -- she has spent more time with W. than any aide except Andy Card -- that caused George Bush to forget that flattery and catering to his every need are not qualifications for the Supreme Court.''We're innately lazy, like lions,'' a male friend said. ''We like whoever happens to be around.''President Bush is still the same loyalty enforcer he was for Dad. He likes deference and dislikes checks and balances. Having one of his handmaidens on a Supreme Court designed to be free of ''obsequious instruments,'' as Alexander Hamilton called cronies, makes perfect sense to him, just as paying conservative columnists to promote his agenda made sense.Without his ''Boy Genius,'' Mr. Bush has turned to other shields. Laura gave the fidgeting and blinking president support on the ''Today'' show on Tuesday, telling Matt Lauer that criticism of Ms. Miers might be sexist.That's silly. The conservatives want a female justice -- they just want one who will be reliably certain to influence the court to curb women's rights.On Thursday, again with weird and stilted body language, and an earpiece that kept falling out, W. held a teleconference and tried to use 10 American soldiers from the Army's 42nd Infantry Division in Tikrit and one Iraqi soldier as props to offer a more upbeat assessment of the security preparations for the weekend vote.The surprise wasn't that it turned out to be rehearsed, although that angered some uniformed officers at the Pentagon who felt the troops were being politicized and used as military window dressing. If these brave young men and women can be trusted to carry guns and kill insurgents, these officers reasoned, why can't they be trusted to speak into a microphone without stage-managing and a rehearsal from a civilian spin doctor?The surprise was how inept the event was. The White House was always able to pull off these stagey, scripted events during the campaign and when selling the Iraq war.It's hard to believe sunny reports from Tikrit with Syria turning into Iraq's Cambodia. As James Risen and David Sanger write in The Times today, ''A series of clashes in the last year between American and Syrian troops  has raised the prospect that cross-border military operations may become a dangerous new front in the Iraq war.''It was hard to tell whom that teleconference was aimed at impressing -- unless it was just meant to cheer up the edgy W. Instead, it just made him seem more lost than ever.Op-Ed ColumnistI was just coming to grips with the idea that a Supreme Court nominee doesn't need to have any experience for the job.Now it turns out that a Supreme Court nominee doesn't even need to always be a lawyer in good standing.Harriet Miers shared a little secret about herself on her application to be an associate justice: ''Earlier this year, I received notice that my dues for the District of Columbia bar were delinquent and as a result, my ability to practice law in D.C. had been suspended.''Did that little dog on the birthday card she sent W. eat her dues?Ms. Miers, then the White House counsel, remedied the situation after she got the letter. But weren't the Bush spinners making a case for her by reporting that she was really great at managing the paper flow when she was the president's staff secretary?Now we discover that she could be such a scatterbrain about paperwork that a little tiny thing like being able to legally practice law slipped her mind while she was serving as the lawyer for the leader of the free world?There was another odd, unfocused episode with the Republican senator Arlen Specter this week. He said that he and Ms. Miers had talked privately on Monday and that she had expressed support for two Supreme Court rulings that established a right to privacy and are viewed as the foundation for Roe v. Wade.Before Ms. Miers could even forget her bar dues again, the White House said that Senator Specter was mistaken, and Ms. Miers called to tell him so. Mr. Specter was willing to say he'd misunderstood, and will surely want to clear all this up in the hearings.But maybe he'll wind up sticking by his earlier statement: ''She needs a crash course in constitutional law.''The White House gambits to soothe the wrath of the right and flesh out the views of Ms. Miers, in lieu of an actual judicial record, are creating more confusion. In order to sell her, officials had to expose her by sending her anti-abortion positions from 1989 to the Senate Judiciary Committee.She's on record as favoring one of the most restrictive positions on abortion: ''actively'' supporting a constitutional amendment to make abortion illegal except when the mother is actually about to die (never mind if her health might be severely impaired or she's a victim of rape or incest).When she was running for City Council in Dallas, Ms. Miers answered yes to all the questions from Texans United for Life, an anti-abortion group, elaborating on only one: whether she would vote to keep anyone who supported abortion rights out of city jobs dealing with health issues. After saying yes, she added ''to the extent pro-life views are relevant.''''The answers clearly reflect that Harriet Miers is opposed to Roe v. Wade,'' Senator Dianne Feinstein of California said. ''This raises very serious concerns about her ability to fairly apply the law without bias in this regard.''With Karl Rove on grand jury watch and Dick Cheney snugly tucked into his underground bunker, W. and Andy Card are in control, and the West Wing ineptitude is comic.First the White House tried to make Ms. Miers seem more conservative by peddling her pedigree as a member of an ultraconservative evangelical church to its right-wing base. When injecting religion into the hearings backfired, officials started backpedaling and saying she shouldn't be asked about her faith, even though the president himself had said that her faith was a big part of her appeal.Then when her draconian views on abortion came out, the White House immediately tried to assuage the left. The White House flack Scott McClellan turned on his fog machine, saying, ''The role of a judge is very different from the role of a candidate or a political officeholder.''Mr. McClellan's answers about the questionnaire were opaque, but were meant to leave the impression that a Justice Miers might view abortion differently than the candidate Miers.That's very interesting, since the president cited her constancy as one of her chief attractions, implying, to quell conservative worries, that she would not be another David Souter.''I know her well enough to be able to say that she's not going to change, that 20 years from now she'll be the same person with the same philosophy that she is today,'' W. said.Some Democrats who have interviewed her recently have failed to see in her the intellectual rigor that W. saw and find her résumé so thin that it would not even earn a ''Heavy Hitter'' profile in The American Lawyer magazine. Answering the Senate Judiciary Committee's questionnaire, she said that in her two years on the City Council she dealt with such weighty constitutional issues as  zoning.Op-Ed ColumnistI've always liked Judy Miller. I have often wondered what Waugh or Thackeray would have made of the Fourth Estate's Becky Sharp.The traits she has that drive many reporters at The Times crazy -- her tropism toward powerful men, her frantic intensity and her peculiar mixture of hard work and hauteur -- have never bothered me. I enjoy operatic types.Once when I was covering the first Bush White House, I was in The Times's seat in the crowded White House press room, listening to an administration official's background briefing. Judy had moved on from her tempestuous tenure as a Washington editor to be a reporter based in New York, but she showed up at this national security affairs briefing.At first she leaned against the wall near where I was sitting, but I noticed that she seemed agitated about something. Midway through the briefing, she came over and whispered to me, ''I think I should be sitting in the Times seat.''It was such an outrageous move, I could only laugh. I got up and stood in the back of the room, while Judy claimed what she felt was her rightful power perch.She never knew when to quit. That was her talent and her flaw. Sorely in need of a tight editorial leash, she was kept on no leash at all, and that has hurt this paper and its trust with readers. She more than earned her sobriquet ''Miss Run Amok.''Judy's stories about W.M.D. fit too perfectly with the White House's case for war. She was close to Ahmad Chalabi, the con man who was conning the neocons to knock out Saddam so he could get his hands on Iraq, and I worried that she was playing a leading role in the dangerous echo chamber that Senator Bob Graham, now retired, dubbed ''incestuous amplification.'' Using Iraqi defectors and exiles, Mr. Chalabi planted bogus stories with Judy and other credulous journalists.Even last April, when I wrote a column critical of Mr. Chalabi, she fired off e-mail to me defending him.When Bill Keller became executive editor in the summer of 2003, he barred Judy from covering Iraq and W.M.D. issues. But he acknowledged in The Times's Sunday story about Judy's role in the Plame leak case that she had kept ''drifting'' back. Why did nobody stop this drift?Judy admitted in the story that she ''got it totally wrong'' about W.M.D. ''If your sources are wrong,'' she said, ''you are wrong.'' But investigative reporting is not stenography.The Times's story and Judy's own first-person account had the unfortunate effect of raising more questions. As Bill said yesterday in an e-mail note to the staff, Judy seemed to have ''misled'' the Washington bureau chief, Phil Taubman, about the extent of her involvement in the Valerie Plame leak case.She casually revealed that she had agreed to identify her source, Scooter Libby, Dick Cheney's chief of staff, as a ''former Hill staffer'' because he had once worked on Capitol Hill. The implication was that this bit of deception was a common practice for reporters. It isn't.She said that she had wanted to write about the Wilson-Plame matter, but that her editor would not allow it. But Managing Editor Jill Abramson, then the Washington bureau chief, denied this, saying that Judy had never broached the subject with her.It also doesn't seem credible that Judy wouldn't remember a Marvel comics name like ''Valerie Flame.'' Nor does it seem credible that she doesn't know how the name got into her notebook and that, as she wrote, she ''did not believe the name came from Mr. Libby.''An Associated Press story yesterday reported that Judy had coughed up the details of an earlier meeting with Mr. Libby only after prosecutors confronted her with a visitor log showing that she had met with him on June 23, 2003. This cagey confusion is what makes people wonder whether her stint in the Alexandria jail was in part a career rehabilitation project.Judy refused to answer a lot of questions put to her by Times reporters, or show the notes that she shared with the grand jury. I admire Arthur Sulzberger Jr. and Bill Keller for aggressively backing reporters in the cross hairs of a prosecutor. But before turning Judy's case into a First Amendment battle, they should have nailed her to a chair and extracted the entire story of her escapade.Judy told The Times that she plans to write a book and intends to return to the newsroom, hoping to cover ''the same thing I've always covered -- threats to our country.'' If that were to happen, the institution most in danger would be the newspaper in your hands.Op-Ed ColumnistAfter W. was elected, he sometimes gave visitors a tour of the love alcove off the Oval Office where Bill trysted with Monica -- the notorious spot where his predecessor had dishonored the White House.At least it was only a little pantry -- and a little panting.If W. wants to show people now where the White House has been dishonored in far more astounding and deadly ways, he'll have to haul them around every nook and cranny of his vice president's office, then go across the river for a walk of shame through the Rummy empire at the Pentagon.The shocking thing about the trellis of revelations showing Dick Cheney, the self-styled Mr. Strong America, as the central figure in dark conspiracies to juice up a case for war and demonize those who tried to tell the public the truth is how unshocking it all is.It's exactly what we thought was going on, but we never thought we'd actually hear the lurid details: Cheney and Rummy, the two old compadres from the Nixon and Ford days, in a cabal running the country and the world into the ground, driven by their poisonous obsession with Iraq, while Junior is out of the loop, playing in the gym or on his mountain bike.Mr. Cheney has been so well protected by his Praetorian guard all these years that it's been hard for the public to see his dastardly deeds and petty schemes. But now, because of Patrick Fitzgerald's investigation and candid talk from Brent Scowcroft and Lawrence Wilkerson, he's been flushed out as the heart of darkness: all sulfurous strands lead back to the man W. aptly nicknamed Vice.According to a Times story yesterday, Scooter Libby first learned about Joseph Wilson's C.I.A. wife from his boss, Mr. Cheney, not from reporters, as he'd originally suggested. And Mr. Cheney learned it from George Tenet, according to Mr. Libby's notes.The Bush hawks presented themselves as protectors and exporters of American values. But they were so feverish about projecting the alternate reality they had constructed to link Saddam and Al Qaeda -- and fulfilling their idée fixe about invading Iraq -- they perverted American values.Whether or not it turns out to be illegal, outing a C.I.A. agent -- undercover or not -- simply to undermine her husband's story is Rove-ishly sleazy. This no-leak administration was perfectly willing to leak to hurt anyone who got in its way.Vice also pressed for a loophole so the C.I.A. could do torture-light on prisoners in U.S. custody, but John McCain rebuffed His Tortureness. Senator McCain has sponsored a measure to bar the cruel treatment of prisoners because he knows that this is not who we are. (Remember the days when the only torture was listening to politicians reciting their best TV lines at dinner parties?)Colonel Wilkerson, the former chief of staff for Colin Powell, broke the code and denounced Vice's vortex, calling his own involvement in Mr. Powell's U.N. speech, infected with bogus Cheney and Scooter malarkey, ''the lowest point'' in his life.He followed that with a blast of blunt talk in a speech and an op-ed piece in The Los Angeles Times, saying that foreign policy had been hijacked by ''a secretive, little-known cabal'' that hated dissent. He said the cabal was headed by Mr. Cheney, ''a vice president who speaks only to Rush Limbaugh and assembled military forces,'' and Donald Rumsfeld, ''a secretary of defense presiding over the death by a thousand cuts of our overstretched armed forces.''''I believe that the decisions of this cabal were sometimes made with the full and witting support of the president and sometimes with something less,'' Colonel Wilkerson wrote. ''More often than not, then-national security adviser Condoleezza Rice was simply steamrolled by this cabal.''Brent Scowcroft, Bush Senior's close friend, let out a shriek this week to Jeffrey Goldberg in The New Yorker, revealing his estrangement from W. and his old protégé Condi. He disdained Paul Wolfowitz as a naïve utopian and said he didn't ''know'' his old friend Dick Cheney anymore. Vice's alliance with the neocons, who were determined to finish in Iraq what Mr. Scowcroft and Poppy had declared finished, led him to lead the nation into a morass. Troop deaths are now around 2,000, a gruesome milestone.''The reason I part with the neocons is that I don't think in any reasonable time frame the objective of democratizing the Middle East can be successful,'' Mr. Scowcroft said. ''If you can do it, fine, but I don't think you can, and in the process of trying to do it you can make the Middle East a lot worse.''W. should take the Medal of Freedom away from Mr. Tenet and give medals to Colonel Wilkerson and Mr. Scowcroft.Op-Ed ColumnistIt was bracing to see the son of a New York doorman open the door on the mendacious Washington lair of the Lord of the Underground.But this Irish priest of the law, Patrick Fitzgerald, neither Democrat nor Republican, was very strict, very precise. He wasn't totally gratifying in clearing up the murkiness of the case, yet strangely comforting in his quaint black-and-white notions of truth and honor (except when his wacky baseball metaphor seemed to veer toward a ''Who's on first?'' tangle).''This indictment's not about the propriety of the war,'' he told reporters yesterday in his big Eliot Ness moment at the Justice Department. The indictment was simply about whether the son of an investment banker perjured himself before a grand jury and the F.B.I.Scooter does seem like a big fat liar in the indictment. And not a clever one, since his deception hinged on, of all people, the popular monsignor of the trusted Sunday Church of Russert. Does Scooter hope to persuade a jury to believe him instead of Little Russ?There is something grotesque about Scooter's hiding behind the press with his little conspiracy, given that he's part of an administration that despises the press and tried to make its work almost impossible.Mr. Fitzgerald claims that Mr. Libby hurt national security by revealing the classified name of a C.I.A. officer. ''Valerie Wilson's friends, neighbors, college classmates had no idea she had another life,'' he said.He was not buying the arguments on the right that Mrs. Wilson was not really undercover or was under ''light'' cover, or that blowing her cover did not hurt the C.I.A.''I can say that for the people who work at the C.I.A. and work at other places, they have to expect that when they do their jobs that classified information will be protected,'' he said, adding: ''They run a risk when they work for the C.I.A. that something bad could happen to them, but they have to make sure that they don't run the risk that something bad is going to happen to them from something done by their own fellow government employees.''To protect a war spun from fantasy, the Bush team played dirty. Unfortunately for them, this time they Swift-boated an American whose job gave her legal protection from the business-as-usual smear campaign.The back story of this indictment is about the ongoing Tong wars of the C.I.A., the White House, the State Department and the Pentagon: the fight over who lied us into war. The C.I.A., after all, is the agency that asked for a special prosecutor to be appointed to investigate how one of its own was outed by the White House.The question Mr. Fitzgerald repeatedly declined to answer yesterday -- Dick Cheney's poker face has finally met its match -- was whether this stops at Scooter.No one expects him to ''flip,'' unless he finally gets the sort of fancy white-collar criminal lawyer that The Washington Post said he is searching for -- like the ones who succeeded in getting Karl Rove off the hook, at least for now -- and the lawyer tells Scooter to nail his boss to save himself.But what we really want to know, now that we have the bare bones of who said what to whom in the indictment, is what they were all thinking there in that bunker and how that hothouse bred the idea that the way out of their Iraq problems was to slime their critics instead of addressing the criticism. What we really want to know, if Scooter testifies in the trial, and especially if he doesn't, is what Vice did to create the spidery atmosphere that led Scooter, who seemed like an interesting and decent guy, to let his zeal get the better of him.Mr. Cheney, eager to be rid of the meddlesome Joe Wilson, got Valerie Wilson's name from the C.I.A. and passed it on to Scooter. He forced the C.I.A. to compromise one of its own, a sacrifice on the altar of faith-based intelligence.Vice spent so much time lurking over at the C.I.A., trying to intimidate the analysts at Langley into twisting the intelligence about weapons, that he should have had one of his undisclosed locations there.This administration's grand schemes always end up as the opposite. Officials say they're promoting national security when they're hurting it; they say they're squelching terrorists when they're breeding them; they say they're bringing stability to Iraq when the country's imploding. (The U.S. announced five more military deaths yesterday.)And the most dangerous opposite of all: W. was listening to a surrogate father he shouldn't have been listening to, and not listening to his real father, who deserved to be listened to.Op-Ed ColumnistScooter used to be Cheney's Cheney.Now we've got Cheney's Cheney's Cheney.This is not an improvement.Once Scooter left, many people, including a lot of alarmed conservatives and moderate Republicans, were hoping that W. and Vice would throw open some White House windows to let the air and sun in, and climb out of that incestuous, secretive, vindictive, hallucinatory dark hole they've been bunkered in for five years.But they like it in their paranoid paradise. One of the most confounding aspects of W.'s exceedingly confounding presidency is his apparent unwillingness to consider that anyone who ever worked for him -- and was in any way responsible for any of the disasters now afflicting his administration -- should be jettisoned.This is not loyalty. This is myopia. Where is a meddling, power-intoxicated first lady when we need one? Maybe the clever Nancy Reagan should have a little talk with Laura Bush tonight at the dinner for Prince Charles and Camilla, and explain to her how to step in and fire overweening officials who are hurting your man.Vice thumbed his nose yesterday at the notion that he should clean up his creepy laboratory when he promoted two Renfields who are part of the gang that got us into this mess.Dick Cheney has appointed David Addington as his new chief of staff, an ideologue who is so fanatically secretive, so in love with the shadows, so belligerent and unyielding that he's known around town as the Keyser Soze of the usual suspects. At 48, Mr. Addington is a legend: he's worked his way up the G.O.P. scandal ladder from Iran-contra to Abu Ghraib.Unlike Scooter, this lone-wolf lawyer doesn't reach out to journalists, even to use them as conduits or covers; he makes his boss look gregarious. He routinely declines to be interviewed or photographed.Vice also appointed John Hannah as his national security adviser, a title also held by Scooter. Mr. Addington and Mr. Hannah often battled with the C.I.A. and State as the cabal pushed the case that Saddam was a direct threat to America, sabotaging Colin Powell's reputation when it ''helped'' with his U.N. speech. Mr. Hannah was the contact for Ahmad Chalabi, who went around the C.I.A. to feed Vice's office the baloney intel and rosy scenarios that suckered the U.S. into war.Mr. Addington has done his best to crown King Cheney. As Dana Milbank wrote in The Washington Post, Mr. Addington pushed an obscure philosophy called the unitary executive theory that ''favors an extraordinarily powerful president.'' He would go ''through every page of the federal budget in search of riders that could restrict executive authority.''''He was a principal author of the White House memo justifying torture of terrorism suspects,'' Mr. Milbank wrote. ''He was a prime advocate of arguments supporting the holding of terrorism suspects without access to courts. Addington also led the fight with Congress and environmentalists over access to information about corporations that advised the White House on energy policy.'' And he helped stonewall the 9/11 commission.The National Journal pointed out that Scooter had talked to Mr. Addington and Mr. Hannah about Joseph Wilson and his C.I.A. wife when he was seeking more information to discredit them in the press. Mr. Addington, the story said, ''was deeply immersed'' in the White House damage-control campaign to deflect criticism about warped W.M.D. intelligence, and attended strategy sessions in 2003 on how to discredit Mr. Wilson.''Further,'' the magazine said, ''Addington played a leading role in 2004 on behalf of the Bush administration when it refused to give the Senate Intelligence Committee documents from Libby's office on the alleged misuse of intelligence information regarding Iraq.''Mr. Addington may as well have turned the documents over for safekeeping to Pat Roberts, because, as it turned out, the Republican chairman of the Intelligence Committee didn't want to investigate anything.Angry at the Scooter scandal, the Addington appointment and the Roberts stonewalling, Senate Democrats did something remarkable yesterday: they dimmed the lights, stamped their feet and shut down the Senate.Tired of being in the dark, the Democrats put the Republicans in the dark. Childish, perhaps, but effective. Republicans screamed but grudgingly agreed to take a look at where the investigation stands. But even if the Senate starts investigating again, Mr. Addington, now promoted, will have even more authority not to cooperate.It's the Cheney chain of command.Op-Ed ColumnistI've said it before and I'll say it again: Men are simply not biologically suited to hold higher office. The Bush administration has proved that once and for all.These guys can't be bothered to run the country. They are too obsessed with frivolous stuff, like fashion and whether they look fat. They are catty, sometimes even sabotaging their closest friends. They are deceitful minxes and malicious gossips.And heaven knows they're bad at math. Otherwise, W. would realize that a 60 percent disapproval rating, or worse, means that most Americans would like some fresh blood in the administration. It's appalling to see ringleaders of the incompetent, mendacious crew who rushed into Iraq but not New Orleans getting big promotions and posh consulting jobs.Let's first consider the astonishing new cache of Brownie e-mail released by the Congressional panel investigating the heartbreaking Katrina non-response.Batting away the frantic warnings of death and doom in New Orleans, bubbleheaded Brownie boasted of his style sense, replying to a staffer who told him his outfit looked ''fabulous'' on TV: ''I got it at Nordstrom.''In another e-mail to staffers, he preened: ''If you'll look at my lovely FEMA attire, you'll really vomit. I am a fashion god.''Brownie had other things on his mind besides managing the most expensive natural disaster in U.S. history: restaurants and dog sitters, and marshaling spin for stories about his past management gaffes at the International Arabian Horse Association.By Sept. 4, with disaster apartheid in full view, Brownie was getting e-mail advice from his press secretary: ''You just need to look more hardworking,'' Sharon Worthy wrote the FEMA Fashionista. ''ROLL UP THE SLEEVES!''It may seem unfathomable that W. has kept Brownie, one of the biggest boobs in U.S. history, on the federal payroll as a $148,000-a-year consultant.But President Bush may be empathetic to Brownie's concerns about looking good. Obsessed with losing the seven pounds he'd gained around his waist, W. was so focused on getting back his hourglass figure that his staff had to compile an emergency DVD of Katrina news stories before he could be dragged away from biking.Unless it's some catty attempt to undermine someone you're pretending to like, how to explain the Mean Girls cabal headed by Dick Cheney, Rummy and the Rummy aide Douglas Feith? These hawkish Heathers lured W. into war with hyped intelligence and then clawed out Colin Powell's eyes to take charge of the occupation, only to bollix up the whole thing beyond belief and send the president's ratings cratering.The former Powell chief of staff, Col. Lawrence Wilkerson, who often verbalizes what Mr. Powell does not say because the ex-secretary of state does not want to be in a public catfight with the cabal, charged on NPR that the cabal issued directives that led to the abuse of prisoners by U.S. soldiers in Iraq and Afghanistan.''It was clear to me,'' he said, ''that there was a visible audit trail from the vice president's office through the secretary of defense down to the commanders in the field that in carefully couched terms -- I'll give you that -- that to a soldier in the field meant two things: we're not getting enough good intelligence and you need to get that evidence -- and, oh, by the way, here's some ways you probably can get it.''Colonel Wilkerson called David Addington, the shadowy Cheney counsel who has been promoted to Scooter's chief of staff job, ''a staunch advocate of allowing the president in his capacity as commander in chief to deviate from the Geneva Conventions.''Heathers have their own rules. Having ignored the warnings that an invasion would cause an insurgency, the Vice squad stepped up the torture to try to stop an insurgency born amid the arrogant, incompetent occupation.The colonel also described how Vice shaped war policy. Mr. Cheney's fiercely ideological staff monitored the National Security Council staff in such Big Brother fashion that some of the N.S.C. staff ''quit using e-mails for substantive conversations because they knew the vice president's alternate national security staff was reading their e-mails now.''Colonel Wilkerson said that there was an N.S.C. memo that made a compelling argument for a large number of troops being necessary in Iraq, ''and to this day, I don't know whether that memorandum ever got to the president of the United States.''Women are affected by hormones only at times. Vice's hormones rage every day.Op-Ed ColumnistIn the vice president's new, more fortified bunker, inside his old undisclosed secure location within the larger bunker that used to be called the West Wing of the White House, Dick Cheney was muttering and sputtering.He wasn't talking to the pictures on the wall, as Nixon did when he finally cracked. Vice doesn't trust those portraits anyway. The walls have ears. He was talking to the only reliable man in a city of dimwits, cowards, traitors and fools: himself.He hurled a sheaf of news reports with such force it knocked over the picture of Ahmad Chalabi that he keeps next to the picture of Churchill. Winston Chalabi, he likes to call him.Vice is fed up with all the whining and carping -- and that's just inside the White House. The only negativity in Washington is supposed to be his own. He's the only one allowed to scowl and grumble and conspire.The impertinent Tom DeFrank reported in New York's Daily News that embattled White House aides felt ''President Bush must take the reins personally'' to save his presidency.Let him try, Cheney said with a sneer. Things are nowhere near dire enough for that. Even if Junior somehow managed to grab the reins to his presidency, Vice holds Junior's reins. So he just needs to get all these sniveling, poll-driven wimps and losers back on board with the master plan.Things had been going so smoothly. The global torture franchise was up and running. Halliburton contracts were flowing. Tax cuts were sailing through. Oil companies were raking it in. Alaska drilling was thrillingly close. The courts were defending his executive privilege on energy policy, and people were still buying all that smoke about Saddam's being responsible for 9/11, and that drivel about how we're fighting them there so we don't have to fight them here. Everything was groovy.But not anymore. Cheney could not believe that Karl had made him go out and call that loudmouth Jack Murtha a patriot. He was sure the Pentagon generals had put the congressman up to calling for a withdrawal from Iraq. Is the military brass getting in touch with its pacifist side? In Wyoming, Vice shoots doves.How dare Murtha suggest that Cheney dodged and dodged and dodged and dodged and dodged the draft? Murtha thinks he knows about war just because he served in one and was a marine for 37 years? Vice started his own war. Now that's a credential!It always goes this way with the cut-and-run crowd. First they start nitpicking the war, complaining about little things like the lack of armor for the troops. Then they complain that there aren't enough troops. Well, that would just require more armor that we don't have. Then they kvetch about using incendiary weapons in a city like Falluja. Vice likes the smell of white phosphorus in the morning.What really enrages him is all the Republicans in the Senate making noises about timetables. Before you know it, it's going to be helicopters on the rooftop at the Baghdad embassy.Just because Junior's approval ratings are in the 30's, people around here are going all wobbly. Vice was 10 points lower and he wasn't worried. Numbers are for sissies.Why do Harry Reid and his Democratic turncoats think they can call the White House on the carpet? Do they think Vice would fear to lie about lying about the rationale for going to war? A real liar never stops lying.He didn't want to have to tell the rest of the senators to go do to themselves what he had told Patrick Leahy to go do to himself.Now all these idiots are getting caught, even Scooter. DeLay's on the ropes and the Dukester is a total embarrassment, spending bribes on antique commodes and a Rolls-Royce. Vice should never have let an amateur get involved with defense contracts.Republican moderates are running scared in the House, worried about re-election. Even senators seem to have forgotten which side their bread is oiled on. Ted Stevens let oil company executives get caught lying about the energy task force meeting, while Vice can't even get a little thing like torture chambers through the Senate. What's so wrong with a little torture?And now John Warner wants Junior to use fireside chats to explain his plan for Iraq. When did everybody get the un-American idea that the president is answerable to America?Vice is fed up with the whining of squirrelly surrogates like Brent Scowcroft and Lawrence Wilkerson on behalf of peaceniks like George Senior and Colin Powell. If Poppy's upset about his kid's mentor, he should be man enough to come slug it out.Poppy isn't getting Junior back, Vice vowed, muttering: ''He's my son. It's my war. It's my country.''(And the bad news is: this man is our vice president.)Thomas L. Friedman is on vacation.Op-Ed ColumnistIn the Christmas spirit, the time has come for the reality-based community to reach out to the White House.The Bush warriors are so deluded, they're even faking their fakery.This week, the president presented a plan-like plan for ''victory'' in Iraq, which Scott McClellan rather pompously called the unclassified version of their supersecret master plan. But there would be no way to achieve victory from this plan even if it were a real plan. If this is what they're telling themselves in the Sit Room, we're in bigger trouble than we thought.Talk about your unknown unknowns, as Rummy would say.The National Strategy for Victory must have come from the same P.R. genius who gave President Top Gun the ''Mission Accomplished'' banner about 48 hours before the first counterinsurgency war of the 21st century broke out in Iraq.It's not a military strategy -- classified or unclassified. It's political talking points -- and not even good ones. Are we really supposed to believe that anybody, even the most deeply delusional Bush sycophant, believes the phrase ''Our strategy is working''?The president talked about three neatly definable groups of insurrectionists. But as Dexter Filkins reported in yesterday's New York Times, there are dozens, perhaps as many as a hundred, groups fighting the U.S. Army in Iraq, and they have little, if anything, in common.Mr. Bush's presentation claimed that the U.S. was actually making progress in Iraq. But outside the Bush-Cheney-Rummy bubble, 10 more marines were killed by a roadside bomb outside Falluja, for a total of 2,125 U.S. military deaths so far.The administration must realize it needs a real exit strategy, because it's advertising for one. The U.S. Agency for International Development is offering more than $1 billion for anyone -- anyone at all -- who can come up with a plan to pacify and rebuild 10 Iraqi cities seen as vital in the war.Maybe the White House should apply -- Usaid's proffer says the ''invitation is open to any type of entity.''When Bush officials weren't telling us fairy tales about the big, bad W.M.D. in Iraq, they were assuring us that the unprovoked war would be a kindness for Iraq, giving it democracy. But they are not just failing to bring democracy to Iraq as they help Iranian-backed mullahs install an Islamic republic with Saddamist torture chambers. They are also degrading democracy in America.They've tarnished American moral leadership with illegal detentions, torture, secret C.I.A. prisons in countries only recently liberated from the Soviet gulag, and Soviet-style propaganda both at home and in Iraq.Guess the Bush administration didn't learn anything this fall when federal auditors said it had violated the law by buying favorable news coverage of its education polices. Bush officials got right back into the fake news business, paying to plant propaganda in the Iraqi press. They outsourced this disinformation campaign to something called the Lincoln Group -- have they no shame?You have to admire Scott McClellan, the president's spokesman. He kept a straight face when he called the U.S. ''a leader when it comes to promoting and advocating a free and independent media around the world.'' He added, ''We've made our views very clear when it comes to freedom of the press.''Exceedingly clear. The Bushies don't believe in it. They disdain the whole democratic system of checks and balances.At the Naval Academy, President Bush talked about how well the Iraqi security forces were fighting. He claimed that 40 Iraqi battalions were taking the lead in the fight against insurgents, and that in the battle of Tal Afar this year, ''the assault was primarily led by Iraqi security forces -- 11 Iraqi battalions backed by 5 coalition battalions providing support.''Anderson Cooper of CNN swiftly produced Time magazine's Baghdad bureau chief, Michael Ware, who was embedded with the U.S. military during the entire Tal Afar battle. ''With the greatest respect to the president, that's completely wrong,'' Mr. Ware said, adding: ''I was with Iraqi units right there on the front line as they were battling with Al Qaeda. They were not leading.''He also told Mr. Cooper: ''I have had a very senior officer here in Baghdad say to me that there's never going to be a point where these guys will be able to stand up against the insurgency on their own.''Mr. Ware recalled that in a battle two weeks ago, he saw an Iraqi security officer put down his weapon and curl up into a ball when he was under attack. ''I have seen that on -- on many, many occasions,'' he said.Curling up in a ball. Good National Strategy for Victory.Op-Ed ColumnistOur secretary of state's tortuous defense of supposedly nonexistent C.I.A. torture chambers in Eastern Europe was an acid flashback to Clintonian parsing.Just as Bill Clinton, during the '92 campaign, pranced around questions about marijuana use at Oxford by saying he had never broken the laws of his country, so Condoleezza Rice pranced around questions about outsourcing torture by suggesting that President Bush had never broken the laws of his country.But in Bill's case, he was only talking about smoking a little joint, while Condi is talking about snatching people off the street and throwing them into lethal joints.''The United States government does not authorize or condone torture of detainees,'' she said.It all depends on what you mean by ''authorize,'' ''condone,'' ''torture'' and ''detainees.''Ms. Rice also claimed that the U.S. did not transport terrorism suspects ''for the purpose of interrogation using torture.'' But, hey, as Rummy likes to say, stuff happens.The president said he was opposed to torture and then effectively issued regulations to allow what any normal person -- and certainly a victim -- would consider torture. Alberto Gonzales et al. have defined torture deviancy downward to the point where it's hard to imagine what would count as torture. Under this administration, prisoners have been hung by their wrists and had electrodes attached to their genitals; they've been waterboarded, exposed to extreme heat and cold, and threatened with death -- even accidentally killed.Does Ms. Rice think anyone is buying her loophole-riddled defense? Not with the Italians thinking of rounding up C.I.A. officers to ask them whether they abducted a cleric in Milan. And with Torquemada Cheney slouching around Capitol Hill trying to circumvent John McCain and legalize torture at the C.I.A.'s secret prisons by preventing Congress from requiring decent treatment for U.S. prisoners.As Scott Shane reports in The Times today, a German man, Khaled el-Masri, says he was kidnapped, beaten and spirited away to Afghanistan by C.I.A. officers in an apparent case of mistaken identity in 2003. He is suing the former C.I.A. chief George Tenet and three companies allegedly involved in the clandestine flights.Mr. Masri, a 42-year-old former car salesman, was refused entry to the U.S. on Saturday. He had intended to hold a news conference in Washington yesterday, but ended up talking to reporters over a video satellite link, telling how he was beaten, photographed nude and injected with drugs during five months in detention.Mr. Masri said through an interpreter: ''I don't think I'm the human being I used to be.''When Ms. Rice was a Stanford professor of international relations, she would have flunked any student who had dared to offer her the sort of willfully disingenuous piffle she spouted on the eve of her European trip.Maybe she figures that if she was able to fool people once with double talk about W.M.D., she can fool them again with double talk about rendition.As chatter spreads about Condi as a possible presidential contender, we are left wondering, once more, who this woman really is. Is she doing this willingly, or is she hemmed in by the powerful men around her? As a former national security adviser who has had the president's ear for five years, did she try to fight the appalling attempt to shred the Geneva Conventions, or did she go along with it? Is she doing Vice's nefarious bidding on torture, just as she did on ginning up the case for invading Iraq?As Condi used weasel words on torture, Hillary took a weaselly position on flag-burning. Trying to convince the conservatives that she's still got a bit of that Goldwater Girl in her, the woman who would be the first woman president is co-sponsoring a Republican bill making it illegal to desecrate the American flag. The red staters backing this measure are generally the ones who already can't stand Hillary, so they won't be fooled.The senator doing Clintonian triangulating is just as transparent as the secretary doing Clintonian parsing.Speaking of silly masquerades, does Judge Samuel Alito Jr. think he's fooling anyone by presenting himself as a reasonable jurist? Here's a guy whose entire career seems to be based on interfering with women's lives. He wanted to overturn Roe v. Wade, condoned the strip search of a 10-year-old girl and belonged to a conservative alumni club that resisted the admission of women to Princeton.All in all, a bad week for women -- sheer torture to watch.Op-Ed Columnist Thomas L. Friedman is on vacation.Can the network nightly news anchor evolve from the Daddy chair to the Mommy chair?Will Americans ever trust a petite, pretty woman in jewel tones to deliver the news as much as they trusted tall men with dark suits and deep voices, like Edward R. Murrow, Walter Cronkite and Tom Brokaw? Can high heels match the venerable trench coat?The network news anchor career path is laden with the same sort of gender tripwires as the one for the presidency. Who should lead us through a crisis?''Does Mommy know best?'' a longtime TV industry analyst mused. ''If there's a gigantically frightening news event, people want to turn on the TV and see someone guiding them through it. Will they be comfortable with Elizabeth Vargas or even Katie Couric?''Last summer, when ABC needed a replacement for Peter Jennings, I asked a top network executive whether the 43-year-old Ms. Vargas had a shot to be the first woman to get a solo network anchor gig. Shouldn't that barrier have been broken long ago? I mean, women can read off a teleprompter as well as men.At first he sounded optimistic: she is not a news division heavyweight, but she is a lovely, competent Hispanic woman, which could mean a more diverse audience. And she might draw in younger viewers, instead of the dinosaur evening news demographic that mostly attracts sponsors like Viagra and Depends.Within 30 seconds, though, the executive got jittery. ''I know this is going to sound really sexist,'' he admitted with breathtaking candor, ''but if there were another 9/11, I'm not sure if she has the gravitas to hold that anchor chair.  Maybe it's not even sex. Maybe it's age. I just think we'd need someone with a little gray in their hair.'' (The network pushed Ms. Vargas out of the anchor seat in favor of Charlie Gibson when terrorists bombed London twice in July 2005, even though his day job was doing fluff on ''Good Morning America.'')I pointed out that Brian Williams was only three years older than Ms. Vargas, and not noticeably gray. Network executives hire babes, not old ladies with wrinkles. Now that high-definition TV makes faces with plastic surgery look so weird, the women will have to be even younger.''He's not 50?'' the exec asked about Mr. Williams. ''But doesn't he have some gray?  Maybe we could let Elizabeth do it Monday through Friday and then someone else could do it if there was a crisis.''I had to laugh. They'd allow a woman to present the news as long as there wasn't any news. If serious news breaks out, send for the guy in pants.So this week, it all came to pass. Despite the track record of the other two women who had to co-anchor the evening news with resentful men -- Barbara Walters and Connie Chung -- ABC teamed Ms. Vargas with the pretty-boy android Bob Woodruff.TV and newspaper moguls are trying a less authoritarian news format. Brian Williams, who broke out of android status with his brilliant coverage of the administration's attention deficit disorder during Katrina, blogs to show he's a man of the people. Anderson Cooper knocked off Aaron Brown by emoting during Katrina, and being fetching enough to make People's Sexiest Man Alive list.Les Moonves, head of CBS, is looking for pizazz. ''On the one hand,'' he told The Times's Lynn Hirschberg, ''we could have a newscast like 'The Big Breakfast' in England, where women give the news in lingerie. Or there's 'Naked News,' which is on cable in England. I saw a clip of it. It's a woman giving the news as she's getting undressed. And then, on the other hand, you could have two boring people behind a desk. Our newscast has to be somewhere in between.''Mr. Moonves has been wooing Katie Couric to succeed Dan Rather -- she seems itchy to move on from making eggnog with Martha Stewart. Like Barbara Walters, she'd get withering scrutiny for earning a record-breaking paycheck (even though a man probably wouldn't).But even if Katie breaks this barrier, presumably with her clothes on, will it be an important milestone for women? She is already the most important breadwinner for her news division, with morning chat shows outearning nightly newscasts. By the time women get to take over something -- like Hollywood or Bush administration diplomacy -- the thing is already devalued beyond recognition.TV evening news is so feminized and soft-focus now -- brimming with features on animals, diets and new ''age defying'' skin treatments -- that Katie may forget she's not still working the sunrise crowd.Op-Ed ColumnistNever ask a guy who's in a bubble if he's in a bubble. He can't answer.'Cause he's in a bubble.But the NBC anchor Brian Williams gamely gave it a shot, showing the president the Newsweek cover picturing him trapped in a bubble.''This says you're in a bubble,'' Brian told W. ''You have a very small circle of advisers now. Is that true? Do you feel in a bubble?''''No, I don't feel in a bubble,'' Bubble Boy replied, unable to see the bubble because he's in it. ''I feel like I'm getting really good advice from very capable people and that people from all walks of life have informed me and informed those who advise me.'' He added, ''I'm very aware of what's going on.''He swiftly contradicted himself by admitting that ''this is the first time I'm seeing this magazine'' -- his version of his dad's Newsweek ''Wimp Factor'' cover -- and that he doesn't read newsmagazines.The anchor and the anchorite spent a few anodyne moments probing the depths of what it's like to be president. ''I just talked to the president-elect of Honduras,'' W. said. ''A lot of my job is foreign policy, and I spend an enormous amount of time with leaders from other countries.''Brian struggled to learn whether W. read anything except one-page memos. Talking about his mom, Bubble Boy returned to the idea of the bubble: ''If I'm in a bubble, well, if there is such thing as a bubble, she's the one who can penetrate it.''''I'll tell the guys at Newsweek,'' the anchor said impishly.''Is that who put the bubble story?'' W. asked. First he didn't know about it, and now he's forgotten it already? That's the alluring, memory-cleansing beauty of the bubble.The idea that W. is getting good advice from very capable people is silly -- administration officials have blown it on everything from the occupation and natural disasters to torture. In the bubble, they can torture while saying they don't. They can pretend that Iraqi forces are stronger than they are. They can try to frighten people with talk of Al Qaeda's dream of a new Islamic caliphate -- their latest attempt to scare Americans into supporting the war they ginned up.''Whether or not it needed to happen,'' the president told the anchor, ''I'm still convinced it needed to happen.'' The Bubble Boy can even contradict himself and not notice.W.'s contention that he's informed by people from all walks of life is a joke, as is his wacky assertion that he can ''reach out'' to the public more than Abraham Lincoln because he has Air Force One. Lincoln actually went to the front in his war, with Minié balls whizzing by. No phony turkey for him.The president may fly over all walks of life in Air Force One or drive by them and hide behind dark-tinted windows. In his bubble, he floats through a comforting world of doting women, respectful military audiences, loyal Republican donors and screened partisan groups -- with protesters, Democrats, journalists, critics and coffins of dead soldiers kept at bay.(He has probably even been shielded from the outrage of John and Stacey Holley, both Army veterans, who were shocked to learn that their only child, Matthew, killed in Iraq, would be arriving in San Diego as freight on a commercial airliner.)Jack Murtha, a hawkish Democrat close to the Pentagon who supported both wars against Iraq waged by the Bushes, has been braying against the Bush isolation. He told Newsweek that a letter he wrote to the president making suggestions about how to fight the Iraq war was ignored for seven months, then brushed off by a deputy under secretary of defense. Even after he went public, he still did not get a call from the White House.''If they talked to people,'' he said, ''they wouldn't get these outbursts.''Mr. Murtha told Rolling Stone that the administration's deafness had doomed Iraq: ''Everything we did was mishandled. Plans that the military and the State Department had in place -- they ignored 'em. The military tells me that when they were planning the invasion, the administration wouldn't let one of the primary three-star generals in the room.''The president's bubble requires constant care. It's not easy to keep out huge tragedies like Katrina, or flawed policies like Iraq. As Newsweek noted, a foreign diplomat ''was startled when Secretary of State Rice warned him not to lay bad news on the president. 'Don't upset him,' she said.''Heaven forbid. Don't burst his bubble.Op-Ed Columnist Thomas L. Friedman is on vacation.As President Bush tries to shake off his dazed look and regain his swagger, he will no doubt dust off his cowboy routine: his gunslinger pose, his squinty-eyed gaze, his dead-or-alive one-liners, his Crawford brush clearing.But this time, he may want to think twice before strapping on a Texas-shaped belt buckle. W. might inadvertently conjure up images of Bushback Mountain.The High Plains, one of the few remaining arenas where men were men, may now evoke something more ambiguous, like men with men. After ''Brokeback Mountain,'' pitching that pup tent on the prairie will never seem the same.Can a culture built on laconic cowboys like John Wayne and Clint Eastwood survive one rough-hewn cowboy crooning to another, as Jake Gyllenhaal's Jack Twist tells Heath Ledger's Ennis Del Mar, ''Sometimes I miss you so much, I can hardly stand it,'' and, ''I wish I knew how to quit you''?The Duke's tough ''Pilgrim, you could've gotten somebody killed today and somebody oughta belt you in the mouth'' has a different ring than Jake's vulnerable entreaty, ''It could be like this, just like this, always.''Hmm. Maybe it's time to take another look at that sway in John Wayne's stride.Everything will have to be re-evaluated. ''High Plains Drifter'' now sounds like a guy who might get arrested in a bus station bathroom. And audiences may be ready for ''The Good, the Bad and the Bad Hair Day.''For decades, Republicans have had electoral success exploiting the simplistic frontier myth. Ronald Reagan galloped in from the West to rescue Washington. Dick Cheney's aides cast him as the stoic rancher who would blast a shotgun at rustlers if they messed with his cattle.In 2004, the G.O.P. convention was staged like ''The Magnificent Seven,'' with a gunslinging posse -- including Rudy Giuliani, Arnold Schwarzenegger and John McCain -- riding in with W. and Vice to save the town from the black hats. Poor John Kerry had to fall back on sailor imagery, skippering a boat into Boston and saluting the crowd with ''I'm John Kerry and I'm reporting for duty.'' At least he managed not to use the Village People's ''In the Navy'' as his theme song.A president who hates dissonance, who prefers a world in black and white, is now confronted by confusing gray shades everywhere he looks.Hollywood is busy sensitizing -- and emotionally layering -- archetypal macho guys, including our most famous alpha male. He's still strong and decisive. His back's as hairy as ever. But it's just not the same Kong.This lovable overgrown monkey is more like the brooding, wounded and steadfast romantic heroes Heathcliff and Rick Blaine. Like Jane Austen's Mr. Darcy, Peter Jackson's big ape goes for gals with spunk. He likes babes who juggle more than jiggle.This gorilla doesn't go around tossing ''gorilla dust,'' as Ross Perot used to call it, just to get into another alpha's space. He doesn't look for a T. rex simply to rip its jaws apart -- he only protects his loved ones. He'd rather hang out on his mountain, enjoying the sunset and watching his gal juggle and do pratfalls.In a way, the new images of alpha archetypes are subversive precisely because the cowboys and the king of the jungle remain macho even as they become more nuanced.The latest Kong waits for the blonde to come to him. ''This time, he really seems to have the qualities of a hero in a woman's romance -- he's distant, he's suffering, he's aloof,'' says Cynthia Erb, a professor and the author of ''Tracking King Kong: A Hollywood Icon in World Culture.''As the hairy antihero grows more sensitive with each remake, the Ann Darrow character gets more sexual and aggressive. ''She goes from a naïve, innocent, screaming, virginal character in the 30's to a sexually free, liberated feminist woman in the 70's,'' Ms. Erb notes. ''In this one, she has the benefits of feminism and is the one who in some ways initiates the courtship. She actually works to earn his interest.'' And tries to save him.For all its dazzling digital spectacle, ''King Kong'' is not as daring as it could be. Peter Jackson could have made Kong a woman. Or, while he was borrowing ''Titanic'' imagery for the lovers' parting on the Empire State Building, he could have gone all the way and made ''Brokeback Island.''Just picture it: Leonardo DiCaprio, blond, doe-eyed and smitten, curled in the ape's epicene yet hairy grip. Kong, swinging both ways.Op-Ed Columnist John Tierney is on vacation.Dick and Rummy are holed up in the den of Rummy's Chesapeake Bay retreat, Mount Misery, pawing through sheafs of transcripts of wiretapped telephone conversations, hunting for inside dope.Chinook helicopters patrol the skies above the red-brick waterfront mansion. Rummy loves the take-no-prisoners lineage of his $1.5 million getaway, built in the 19th century by Edward Covey, an evil slave owner.Winter weekends by a crackling fire are cozy and conspiratorial, now that the two men have nearby spreads in St. Michaels, Md.These squires of surveillance while away their evenings sipping from goblets of Glenlivet and perusing the illegally bugged phone conversations of any American they please. Getting in the holiday spirit, they're mining data to revise their naughty and nice lists.''Check this one out, Dick,'' Rummy says excitedly. ''I've been reading Jennifer Aniston's conversations for the last six months now, and I gotta say, I don't get what she sees in this guy Vince Vaughn. 'Wedding Crashers' was funny. They shot that here in this village, you know. But I don't trust the guy. No way he's going to give up lap dancers and be true. I just don't want to see Jen get hurt again.''Dick grunts. He's deeply absorbed in the classified reports on the F.B.I. infiltration of a Vegan Community Project and a People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals protest against llama fur. He's ruminating over a naked picture of Pamela Anderson emblazoned with the PETA slogan, ''I'd rather go naked than wear fur.''''Porter Goss tells me that Pam was shacking up with Mark McGrath -- you know, he used to be with that band, Sugar Ray?'' Rummy says. ''Listen, Dick, we need to jawbone about this flapdoodle about our stateside spying operation that developed while you were on your whirlwind tour of American torture chambers in Iraq and Afghanistan.''Dick interrupts, ''More torture.''''Some pansies are making unwarranted claims that we should have gotten warrants,'' Rummy continues. ''But we can't worry about the Constitution's fine print during war. Besides, it's fun to secretly blow off the super-secret court. Sure, warrants would have been no problem -- the court has turned down only five government requests since 1979. Why the dickens shouldn't we go in and eavesdrop on whoever we want? Who says we can't do sneak and peak searches whenever we dadburn please?''Junior can try to model himself after Reagan, but you can't beat our old boss Nixon when it came to channeling paranoia in a productive way. Nixon and J. Edgar Hoover had it right: dark times call for dark measures. We're thinking too small, really. Let's sic the I.R.S. on Murtha, McCain and Feingold. Let's bug Condi and Lieberman -- those back-stabbing sons-of-guns want our jobs. Condi has no clue who she's dealing with, right, Dick? I perfected the black art of infighting before Condi was born. And while we're at it, let's tap Risen's phone. His story in The Times about our wiretaps was an outrageous invasion of our privacy and an assault on our monarchy's -- I mean, our executive branch's absolute power. We'll smoke out the rat who leaked that story.''Dick takes a sip of Scotch and nods. ''More snooping,'' he says.''Karl's new game plan of pretending to admit that we made some mistakes in Iraq seems to be working,'' Rummy muses. ''The Kid's approval ratings are picking up. But I hope Georgie's not falling for that contrition guff he's peddling. We don't want him to go wobbly on us. We have a long way to go in Iraq. The Iraqi security forces are still curled in a fetal position. Oh, by the way, Chalabi called today. He thinks Iran did a better job trucking in stuffed ballot boxes for the Shiites than we did for the Sunnis.'' He adds slyly, ''You'd think we'd be better by now at stealing elections.''''More fraud,'' Dick rumbles. ''More rigged elections.''Dick points at the flat-screen TV over the roaring fireplace. It's time for their favorite Sunday night program.''It isn't on yet, big guy,'' Rummy sighs. ''The Kid is yakking again to the nation. He's so desperate he's pre-empting 'Desperate Housewives.' The gals won't be on for 20 minutes.''Dick glowers, sinking deep into his leather chair.''Hey, I've got a great idea!'' Rummy grins. ''You wanna read a phone transcript of a big cat fight between Teri Hatcher and Nicollette Sheridan? Mueller just sent it over. Hot stuff!''Dick perks up. Half his mouth inclines, indicating extreme joy. ''More Nicollette Sheridan,'' he nods.Op-Ed ColumnistAs a Christmas present for our president, who's been going through a rough time lately, I'm not writing the column this Christmas Eve.In keeping with a holiday tradition I began last year, I'm giving the space to my conservative brother, Kevin, who delights in turning the Gray Lady a vivid shade of red.I asked Kevin, a salesman and father of three boys who lives in a Maryland suburb of Washington, to write you, dear readers, a letter with his thoughts on the year. You will find his meditation a refreshing, or regrettable, change from me, depending on your perspective. Here it is, unexpurgated:Ladies and Gentlemen,Christmas has always been my favorite holiday. Maybe it was the extended absence from the stern Franciscan nuns at Nativity grade school. But more likely it was the decorations, the songs, the movies like ''A Christmas Carol'' and ''Miracle on 34th Street,'' that filled people with an unbridled joy and an unusual generosity of spirit. Christmas has generally been celebrated as both a secular and religious holiday in this country. Recently, the P.C. police have decided that the word Christ carries an unbearable religious aura, so they are working hard to strike the word entirely for the more generic Holiday. The battle for the soul of Christmas has heated up.So first, I'd like to give a big thank you to Speaker Hastert for ordering the renamed Holiday tree to revert to its original title of Christmas tree. And why not? We do not decorate the tree for Easter or the Fourth of July. It is a Christmas tree.We live in a country of 295 million people. Eighty percent of them are affiliated with religions. Ten percent don't believe anything at all. Who the hell does Christmas offend?Go back two generations and you will find the real diversity that made our country the greatest in the world. Immigrants brought their customs with them and were accepted. We were taught by our parents to respect the customs and religious beliefs of other people. Let's reach around and give P.C. a swat, like an annoying child in the back seat of a long trip, before Santa and St. Patrick are casualties of war.My mother hated political correctness. ''In my day,'' she'd say, ''people respected each other and minded their own business.'' Still good advice.To the P.C. Elites: The founding fathers guaranteed Freedom OF Religion, not Freedom FROM Religion. Please go away, you are making my hair hurt.To Target: You better check the sales and profit numbers that are CHRISTMAS related before you ban the word.To Michael Moore, Rob Reiner, Barbra Streisand, Susan Sarandon, Tim Robbins and Alec Baldwin: When did you get back?To MSNBC: Susan Estrich, Katrina vanden Heuvel, Lanny Davis.To Hillary: A hearty welcome to the Republican Party.To Bill O'Reilly: Thank you for dragging the P.C. crowd into the open. Maybe they will learn that America doesn't want to be de-Godded.To Maureen: Of course Men are Necessary; who else could write this column?To Jesse Jackson, Sean Penn, Snoop Dog, Susan and Tim: Tookie Williams KILLED four people. Community service does not seem enough.To Judge Jones of Pennsylvania: No Intelligent Design? You are going to be hoping for a Big Bang if St. Peter is checking ID's.To President Bush: Stay the Course. The same people that are calling for troop withdrawal were under their beds on 9/12/01 screaming ''Kill the Infidels!'' Let's fight them there instead of here and bring our troops home with honor as soon as possible.To my Mom: Thanks for teaching your children to love Christmas as much as you did.In the 1950's, my mother used to take Maureen and me to the sloping hill outside the Church of the Nativity. There, workers had assembled a giant stable, complete with figures at least four feet high, on a bed of real straw. Driving north on 13th Street, you could see the floodlit display four blocks away. We stood and admired that display with our Jewish and Protestant neighbors. No one seemed offended. Across the top was an angel, holding a sign that said, ''Peace on Earth, Good Will Toward Men.'' Let's save that.So, my friends, let me wish all of you a Merry Christmas, a Happy Hanukkah, a Blessed Kwanzaa, Feliz Navidad and to all the rest of you: Have a nice day!Op-Ed ColumnistWe start the new year with the same old fear: Dick Cheney.The vice president, who believes in unwarranted, unlimited snooping, is so pathologically secretive that if you use Google Earth's database to see his official residence, the view is scrambled and obscured. You can view satellite photos of the White House, the Pentagon and the Capitol -- but not of the Lord of the Underworld's lair.Vice is literally a shadow president. He's obsessive about privacy -- but, unfortunately, only his own.Google Earth users alerted The Times to this latest bit of Cheney concealment after a front-page story last week about the international fears inspired by free Google software that features detailed displays of things like government and military sites around the world.''For a brief period,'' they reported, ''photos of the White House and adjacent buildings that the United States Geological Survey provided to Google Earth showed up with certain details obscured.'' So Google replaced those images with unaltered photographs taken by a private company.Even though the story did not mention the Cheney residence -- and even though it's not near the White House -- The Times ran a clarifying correction yesterday that said, ''The view of the vice president's residence in Washington remains obscured.''Fitting, since Vice has turned America into a camera obscura, a dark chamber with a lens that turns things upside down.Guys argue that women tend to stew and hold grudges more, sometimes popping up to blow the whistle on a man's bad behavior years later, like a missile out of the night, as Alan Simpson said of Anita Hill.Yet look at Cheney and Rummy. Their steroid-infused power grabs stem from their years stewing in the Ford White House, a time when they felt emasculated because they were stripped of prerogatives.Rummy, a Ford chief of staff who became defense secretary, and his protégé, Cheney, who succeeded him as chief of staff, felt diminished by the post-Watergate laws and reforms that reduced the executive branch's ability to be secretive and unilateral, tilting power back toward Congress.The 70's were also a heady period for the press, which reached the zenith of its power when it swayed public opinion on Vietnam and exposed Watergate. Reporters got greater access to government secrets with a stronger Freedom of Information Act.Chenrummy thought the press was running amok, that leaks should be plugged and that Congress was snatching power that rightfully belonged to the White House.So these two crusty pals spent 30 years dreaming of inflating the deflated presidential muscularity. Cheney christened himself vice president and brought in Rummy for the most ridiculously pumped-up presidency ever. All this was fine with W., whose family motto is: ''We know best. Trust us.''The two regents turned back the clock to the Nixon era, bringing back presidential excesses like wiretapping along with presidential power. As attorney general, John Ashcroft clamped down on the Freedom of Information Act. For two years, the Pentagon has been sitting on a request from The Times's Jeff Gerth to cough up a secret 500-page document prepared by Halliburton on what to do with Iraq's oil industry -- a plan it wrote several months before the invasion of Iraq, and before it got a no-bid contract to implement the plan (and overbill the U.S.). Very convenient.Defending warrantless wiretapping last week, the vice president spoke of his distaste for the erosion of presidential authority in the wake of Watergate and Vietnam.''I do believe that, especially in the day and age we live in, the nature of the threats we face, it was true during the cold war, as well as I think what is true now, the president of the United States needs to have his constitutional powers unimpaired, if you will, in terms of the conduct of national security policy,'' he intoned. Translation: Back off, Congress and the press.Checks, balances, warrants, civil liberties -- they're all so 20th century. Historians must now regard the light transitional tenure of Gerald Ford as the petri dish of this darkly transformational presidency.Consider this: when Vice President Nelson Rockefeller, supported by President Ford, pushed a plan to have the government help develop alternative sources of energy and reduce our dependence on oil and Saudi Arabia, guess who helped scotch it?Dick Cheney. Then and now, the man is a menace.Op-Ed ColumnistConservatives are having fun e-mailing around the sex scenes in Barbara Boxer's new novel, ''A Time to Run.'' A particular favorite is the equine entwine on Page 210, when ''these two fierce animals were coerced into their majestic coupling by at least six people.''''The stallion approached, nostrils flared, hooves lifting with delicate precision, the wranglers hanging on grimly,'' Ms. Boxer wrote with her co-author, Mary-Rose Hayes. Soon, ''the stallion rubbed his nose against the mare's neck and nuzzled her withers. She promptly bit him on the shoulder and, when he attempted to mount, instantly became a plunging devil of teeth and hooves.''The mare's owner remarks that she's hotblooded because she's from Argentina.Ms. Boxer's literary alter ego, Ellen Fischer, the liberal 5-foot-2 senator from California, also has her share of ecstatic biting and nuzzling.As when Greg kisses Ellen ''long and deep.''''Ellen had never tasted such pent-up, aggressive determination and desire.  She bit at his lips, heard her own gasping breath -- and she knew she really must stop this.  She felt his competent hands undressing her, and they fell together through the darkness onto his bed. Greg's naked body was long and elegant, and they meshed with ease and grace.''Reading pols' strained attempts at steamy scenes is discomfiting. Like thinking about your parents and sex, it gives you the heebie-jeebies.''You just don't want to imagine any of these people in their underwear,'' one Democrat said, laughing.Besides, Washington types are more consumed with the line-item veto than majestic meshing. The modern history of sex in the capital has been more maladroit du seigneur than droit du seigneur. From Bob Packwood to Clarence Thomas, the men in the middle of sex scandals always seem more dysfunctional than sensual.The adolescent Bill and Monica pantry trysts were anything but sultry. The president was tormented, dismissing the dalliance as a mere antidote for Oval Office tension.Monica described their final rendezvous in drab terms: ''This was another one of those occasions when I was babbling on about something, and he just kissed me, kind of to shut me up, I think.''Even the most glamorous hookup -- J.F.K. and Marilyn Monroe -- lost some of its film noir allure after a report of how Marilyn had robotically described it to her shrink: ''Marilyn Monroe is a soldier.  The first duty of a soldier is to obey her commander in chief.''A decade ago, Clintonites had fun passing around passages from Newt Gingrich's thriller ''1945,'' written with William Forstchen, featuring such titillations as biting foreplay, ''pouting sex kitten,'' ''exotic mistress'' and ''after-bout inhalation.''At one point, the mistress of the president's chief of staff sits ''athwart'' her lover's chest and hisses that he must tell her a secret ''or I will make you do terrible things.'' (Kinkier than the Contract With America?)When Scooter Libby got in trouble over Valerie Plame, The New Yorker dug out his 1996 book, ''The Apprentice,'' and reviewed its sex scenes. Lauren Collins took note of its homoeroticism and incest, and compared some passages to Penthouse Forum.Scooter had his own animal erotica: ''At age ten the madam put the child in a cage with a bear trained to couple with young girls so the girls would be frigid and not fall in love with their patrons. They fed her through the bars and aroused the bear with a stick when it seemed to lose interest.''Proving that conservatives are not as prudish in fiction as in legislation, Lynne Cheney's 19th-century Wild West book, ''Sisters,'' a sort of distaff ''Brokeback Mountain,'' featured lesbian romps and, oddly, a Republican vice president who dies of a heart attack during sex with his mistress.In Mrs. Cheney's 1981 novel, a woman says of her lesbian lover: ''How well her words describe our love -- or the way it would be if we could remove all impediments, leave this place and join together.  Our lives would flow together, twin streams merging into a single river.''William Cohen and Gary Hart, a bipartisan team who wrote the 1985 ''Double Man'' novel, used similar imagery for the coupling of a senator and a lovely covert C.I.A. agent: ''It was fierce, two rivers of energy rushing together, gloriously, powerfully.''Water metaphors can be hazardous to literature, especially when they flood the Potomac.John Tierney is on vacation.Op-Ed Columnist