lawrence downes
It's hard to believe that it has been 30 years since Captain Quint, the nut-case shark hunter played by Robert Shaw in ''Jaws,'' made one of the most magnificent movie exits ever, sliding feet first and screaming down the gullet of a monster great white.No such indignity, thankfully, ever befell Frank Mundus, the old Montauk shark fisherman who was the inspiration for the character. Far from it -- Mr. Mundus retired quietly 16 years ago to a house in the woods on the Big Island of Hawaii, 2,000 feet above shark level. He and his wife, Jeanette, tend a grove of orange trees, a few sheep and a wild boar named Arnold. He is pushing 80, but apart from a few medical annoyances (''bypass, aneurysm -- the usual,'' the crusty Mr. Mundus said on the phone the other day), he is fit and ready for action.In other words, grab your chum buckets -- Frank Mundus is coming back. He is heading to Montauk this summer to cash in on the 30th anniversary of ''Jaws'' with daily shark-fishing charters in June and July on his old boat, the Cricket II, and a shark-fishing tournament after that.Media feeding patterns being what they are, the East End promises to be Shark Central by then, and Mr. Mundus, who pioneered the artless sport of shark fishing in the 1950's, plans to be in the thick of it. You can be, too, but it won't be cheap: a day with Mr. Mundus runs $1,800 for a party of five.Mr. Mundus is no Robert Shaw, whose portrayal of Quint -- slayer of fish, crusher of beer cans, master of the manly art of obsessive self-destruction -- was one of the best things about ''Jaws.'' But by most accounts, his own included, Mr. Mundus is a wily self-promoter. His Web site, www.fmundus.com, plugs books about him, including his autobiography, ''Fifty Years a Hooker''; Gatorade (''Gatorade Gets Me Going: Look Out, Sharks, Here I Come''); and signed 8-by-10's of a 3,427-pound great white caught from his boat in September 1986.That shark, and a bigger one he harpooned in 1964, made his reputation. ''Jaws'' didn't hurt, though it did kill his monopoly in the shark-charter business. Before Mr. Mundus, nobody in Montauk caught sharks on purpose. But years ago, with swordfish and marlin scarce and white whales out of the question, he tried what he calls ''a Barnum & Bailey trick'': he put up a sign by his boat that said ''Monster Fishing.'' Fishermen were hooked.This is how you fish for sharks: you scatter bloody fish parts into the water and wait. If you wait by a dead whale, as Mr. Mundus did in 1986, you may catch something really big. It's about as complicated as staking out a fire hydrant for a dog. It can be boring, as Mr. Mundus explained while describing a complicated game he invented to make catching sharks more challenging. It involves three fishermen, ropes and nooses, and sounds cruel, though not necessarily crueler than a harpoon.Mr. Mundus, in fact, sounds a little like a conservationist these days. Not everyone recognizes how badly sharks have been overfished and underloved -- victims of Asia's hunger for shark-fin soup and sport fishermen's yearning for a shark-slaying testosterone fix. Mr. Mundus swears by the use of circle hooks, which catch in the jaw, not the gut, increasing a hooked shark's chances of survival. He helped start a shark-tagging program and supports catch-and-release fishing. For someone who once made a living demonizing sharks, he seems sensible, almost compassionate, about them now.So even though Mr. Mundus has killed a lot of sharks and is looking to torment some more, it's hard to begrudge him one more chance to feed at this movie's blockbuster carcass. He will be working 11-hour shifts for weeks on end, jawboning about the old days and how he caught his monsters, and why ''Jaws'' is full of stupid inaccuracies -- it's enough to make you feel sorry for the guy, not to mention his captive customers.The return of Mr. Mundus, I'll admit, also makes me feel a little nostalgic for the traumatic summer of 1975, when Steven Spielberg and his scary movie emptied the nation's beaches and led Bob Hope to joke about moving to Kansas City and posting a guard by his waterbed. Sharks are fun to worry about, as you may remember from 2001, when a sleepy, news-free summer was jolted to life by a shark frenzy in the media. It was pointless, hysterical and heedless of the suffering of the few real victims, but it was better than Gary Condit. Then came September, and that was the end of that.Terror was so much simpler then. If prickly old Mr. Mundus on the Cricket II can revive memories of a shivery time while spreading the word about circle hooks and making a few bucks, he should do so -- with best wishes from all of us on shore.Editorial ObserverThe list of things we do to animals before we eat them is constrained only by the limits of human hunger and ingenuity, which means it is not constrained by much. Trapping, hooking, netting, plucking, bleeding, butterflying, beheading, gutting -- the search for delicious knows few bounds or qualms.That's why it is surprising that a prominent chef, of all people -- Charlie Trotter, the TV celebrity and author from Chicago -- would decide to draw the line at a practice as old and esteemed as the force-feeding of ducks and geese to give them fatty, luscious livers.That's right: Chef Trotter has renounced foie gras, on ethical grounds.He says he stopped serving it about three years ago, after becoming unnerved at the sight of farm ducks being tube-fed into obesity. He kept quiet about it, but the conspicuous absence of foie gras from his menus led to rumors in the restaurant world, and he was outed last Tuesday in The Chicago Tribune.Don't be frightened, foodies, but this may be a trend -- another example of how far the animal-rights cause has come in from the fringe. Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger last year banned the production or sale of foie gras in California. (The law takes effect in 2012, to give the state's tiny foie gras industry -- basically, a guy in Sonoma named Guillermo -- time to adjust.) A similar bill has been introduced in New York, the country's only other foie gras producer. Other chefs, perhaps fearing the unthinkable, have jumped all over Mr. Trotter, calling his gesture hypocritical grandstanding by a media hound (and author, so you know, of ''Charlie Trotter's Meat and Game,'' with recipes like Foie Gras Five Ways and Sweet-and-Sour Braised Lettuce Soup With Foie Gras and Radishes).They should knock it off. Fine cooking is fine art, and Mr. Trotter should feel free to use whatever materials he likes. He says foie gras is cruel, but he could have also called it boring -- a cliché slurped by too many diners who, we suspect, would swoon just as easily over the velvety succulence of Spam or schmaltz on rye, if they were prohibitively priced and listed on the menu in French. By spurning an easy fix of fancy fat, Mr. Trotter is simply making his job a bit harder, and this man-eat-duck world a slightly kinder place. There is much to admire in that.LAWRENCE DOWNESEditorial NotebookThe arrival in multiplexes tomorrow of ''The Amityville Horror,'' the remade spawn of the mother of all suburban-haunted-house movies, is not welcome news on Long Island.We have been practically Satan-free for more than a decade, having survived an era of tabloid criminality so lurid and long that even Saddam Hussein must have wondered what we had that he didn't. From the DeFeo family murders in Amityville in 1974 to the depravities of people like Richard (Angel of Death) Angelo, the dungeon-builder John Esposito and the serial killer Joel Rifkin, this place was the Devil's playground for years.But then Joey Buttafuoco moved away, and many of us were sure that Satan did, too, after deciding that his work here was done.Now, though, we have a movie to remind the world that Lucifer once took a liking to a certain Dutch colonial just south of the Montauk Highway. The crazies are coming out again.The local police are braced for the late-night pranksters, and weary locals are all set to tell rubberneckers with out-of-state plates that the Ocean Avenue they are looking for is a few miles that way, in Massapequa.I don't see why Long Islanders who saw the old movie would want to suffer through the new one, as I did this week. Those who do are in for 89 minutes of ghastly terror. Not from the Devil stuff -- George and Kathy Lutz's story about being evicted by demons was clearly a hoax, as books like ''The Amityville Horror Conspiracy'' showed long ago.The movie offers something even scarier, a true vision of damnation: the trials of a family living beyond its means in a drafty fixer-upper.It begins when Mr. Lutz struggles to convince his wife that buying the house is a bad idea.''If we do this,'' he moans, ''we'll be eating drywall for a year!''He fails, the poor fool. His descent into madness is presaged by bone-chilling lines like these:''Houses don't kill people -- people kill people.''''I gotta fix that squeak.''And the clincher: ''We got the old American dream here. There is no way in hell I'm letting that get away now.''He should have. For example, in the ''babysitter locked in a closet with a pasty-skinned dead girl in a nightgown'' scene, the lights buzz, pop and go out, suggesting a devilish problem with old wiring. Bringing things up to code by snaking miles of new Romex behind the plaster walls would give any homeowner the shakes.The basement has severe seepage issues -- blood in this instance, but it could easily have been water, too, and thus mold. The furnace is stoked by Satan himself, but it can't warm the upper rooms, probably because of the fly swarms in the ducts.The tag line of the 1979 movie -- ''For God's sake, get out!'' -- still applies, especially when you consider cleaning miles of gutters, caulking all those windows, and removing the lead paint and asbestos, and the stains on the hardwood floors where the holy water sizzled.Mr. Lutz becomes a homicidal maniac, and who wouldn't have? Stuck in the 1970's, he has to put up drywall with nails and a hammer, for God's sake.Satan, as Milton tells us in ''Paradise Lost,'' is a princely fiend of bottomless guile, and he may yet return to spell out murderous commands with refrigerator magnets.But the forces of evil range widely in the world. Long Island has Home Depot now, and that, I pray, may be enough to protect us.Editorial ObserverThe people who put out Make magazine are well aware that you could use the information in it to break the law, void your warranty, violate a user agreement, fry a circuit, blow a fuse or poke an eye out.''Technology, the laws, and limitations imposed by manufacturers and content owners are constantly changing,'' an editor's note warns. ''Thus, some of the projects described may not work, may be inconsistent with current laws or user agreements or may damage or adversely affect some equipment. Your safety is your own responsibility, including proper use of equipment and safety gear, and determining whether you have adequate skill and experience.''How scary. And how refreshing. Make, a new quarterly put out by O'Reilly Media, a publisher of computer and technology books in Sebastopol, Calif., is a throwback to an earlier time, before personal computers, to the prehistory of geekiness -- the age of how-to manuals for clever boys, from the 1920's to the 50's. Its compact, booklike format, in fact, directly mimics a 1959 copy of Popular Science, according to its publisher, Dale Dougherty.The technology has changed, but not the creative impulse. Make's first issue, out in February, explained how to take aerial photographs with a kite, a disposable camera and a rig of Popsicle sticks, rubber bands and Silly Putty. It also showed how to build a video-camera stabilizer -- a Steadicam, basically -- with $14 worth of steel pipes, bolts and washers; how to boost a laptop computer's Wi-Fi signal with foil from an Indian take-out restaurant; and how to read credit card magnetic stripes with a device made with mail-order parts and a glue gun.The current issue challenges readers to invent a water purifier with a hypothetical set of supplies including a bicycle with flat tires, bamboo tubes, steel wool, $10 in coins and an endless supply of coconuts.Make is not just a clubhouse for guys with Skittle breath and abbreviated social skills. Beneath all the home-brewed gadgets and cool software tricks lies a sly and subversive agenda. Make, its makers will tell you, is part of a grass-roots rebellion against consumer technology that they say stifles ingenuity by discouraging end-user modification. To these restless minds, increasingly sophisticated consumer products have forced users into a kind of stupefied passivity, with nothing to do but replace batteries and update software, to point and click into a zone of blissed-out consumption. Marketers and programmers anticipate our every need with products that are essentially disposable, since there is no way to fix or adapt them when they break or become obsolete. In this world, to tinker -- to open the case, to fiddle with wires and see what happens -- is to rebel.Arthur C. Clarke wrote long ago that ''any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from magic.'' We live in a particularly magical time, when the gap between what technology has accomplished and the layperson's ability to understand it has become a chasm. Think of the sleek, lovely iPod, whose exterior gives no hint as to how it makes the sounds pouring through your ear buds, or the finale of the movie ''A.I.,'' set more than a thousand years from now, in which advanced beings resembling Sea Monkeys ride computer-generated spaceships with no discernible moving parts. Nothing could look more futuristic -- or more incomprehensibly dull.Thank goodness, then, for Make and its Web log, makezine.com/blog, so technologically astute and yet so solidly grounded in a tactile, breakable, fixable world. Make's quick success -- circulation has hit 60,000 already, at $34.95 a year -- shows that even in this wireless age, hands-on inventiveness and curiosity are not dead, dying or even running a fever. To these homegrown ''makers,'' to use the magazine's preferred coinage, Radio Shack and Dremel tools are not anachronisms, but vital resources for solving problems, delighting oneself and one's friends, and making mischief.Make's editors try not to overdo the words ''hack'' and ''hacker,'' although that is the term most widely used for its target audience -- not just computer vandals, but anyone who manipulates technology in unintended, creative ways. In this usage, Leonardo, Franklin and Jefferson were proto-hackers, Martha Stewart is a domesticated hacker and a certain venerable newspaper column might as well be renamed ''Hacks From Heloise.''That said, the hacks in Make are harder than your basic stenciled pillowcase. The third issue, due out in August, will include projects for tricking out your house for Halloween. That leaves three months to study the instructions and to assemble who knows what will be required: presumably wires, switches, cables, adapters, speakers, goggles, hard drives, joysticks, Legos, plywood, dry ice, acrylics, glue and spent nuclear fuel rods.You'll proceed strictly at your own risk, but if the first two issues of Make are any guide, the trip will be a blast.Editorial ObserverThe web of life can be a trap for the conscience. Try twisting your mind around the human relationship with animals and it may quickly snarl in crisscrossing strands of compassion and guilt. Contortions may ensue.Consider, for example, the strange role reversals behind an effort in Albany to outlaw the force-feeding of waterfowl to engorge their livers into foie gras, the fatty restaurant delicacy. One Senate sponsor, John Bonacic, is an upstate Republican who says he has no special sympathy for ducks or geese, despite what his bill says. He says he wants only to help a Sullivan County constituent -- Hudson Valley Foie Gras, the nation's leading producer of fresh foie gras, which has not only lobbied for the bill, but also helped to write it.Why? Michael Ginor, an owner of Hudson Valley Foie Gras, says he feels an anti-foie-gras mood building and is willing to be put out of business in New York if he can land on his feet somewhere else. The Bonacic bill, unlike others lurking in the legislative wings, does not take effect until 2016, giving Mr. Ginor ample time to make other plans -- moving to Canada, maybe, or an Indian reservation -- without worrying about losing his market dominance or facing prosecution for cruelty.Animal welfare advocates have thus found themselves opposing a foie-gras ban, which in this case they say cynically gives a duck torturer a decade of indulgence.That bill and others like it are going nowhere this session, but they'll be back. The battle against foie gras is being fought on many fronts -- California, the country's only other producer, enacted a law to eventually ban its production and sale, as have other states and countries.To animal welfare groups, the obscenity of force-feeding, known by the French word gavage, is self-evident. But Mr. Ginor and his partner Izzy Yanay, who runs the farm, accuse their critics of anthropomorphism and ignorance of duck anatomy and behavior. They say the practice is as benign as it is ancient, since waterfowl lack a gag reflex and have sturdy throats that easily tolerate grains, grit, stones and inflexible gavage tubes. To understand gavage, they say, is to accept it -- as they insist poultry researchers have, after examining birds for signs of undue stress and suffering during gavage and finding none.I visited Hudson Valley Foie Gras last week, seeing gavage for the first time. I saw no pain or panic in Mr. Yanay's ducks, no quacking or frenzied flapping in the cool, dimly lighted open pens where a young woman with a gavage funnel did her work. The birds submitted matter-of-factly to a 15-inch tube inserted down the throat for about three seconds, delivering about a cup of corn pellets.The practice, done three times a day for a month, followed by slaughter, seemed neither particularly gentle nor particularly rough. It was unnerving to see the tube going down, and late-stage ducks waddling bulkily in their pens, but no more so than watching the epic gorging at the all-you-can-eat buffet at Shoney's, where morbid obesity is achieved voluntarily, with knife and fork.The human appetite for sentient protein -- food that flinches -- is an ethical puzzle that many of us solve by deciding not to think about it. But those who lament the exploitation of God's creatures for human consumption and fun should be careful not to spend all their pity in one place. There is, after all, a vast universe of discomfort and death in American agribusiness, which processes 9 billion chickens and 98 million pigs a year, often in close confinement, ending in slaughter on a monumental scale. Against this backdrop -- not to mention the misery of the veal pen, the mass agony of the trawler net, the sadness of the pet shop and circus -- the sum of animal unhappiness in Hudson Valley's tidily run operation, which kills 250,000 ducks a year, seems trivial.What seems brutal in isolation can be mitigated in context, as any parents who have had a baby circumcised might tell you. Singling out the foie-gras duck for salvation in Albany seems unwarranted and unwise, particularly when doing so would threaten the livelihoods of farmworkers and only drive foie-gras production somewhere else.In Sullivan County -- which could use all the economic activity it can get, beyond the force-feeding of dollar bills into video slots at Monticello Raceway -- Hudson Valley Foie Gras gives a living to 175 people, mostly Latino immigrants. Many of them live in trailers on the grounds and worship in a tiny chapel of crepe-paper streamers and candles in a corner of a warehouse. Those who calculate the cruelty of foie gras would do well to include them in the equation as well.Editorial ObserverLess than a month after 9/11, with terrorism fears threatening to put jet travel and thus the Hawaiian economy into a death spiral, tourism officials there announced an emergency marketing campaign to promote the state as a place of rest, solace and healing. Anyone who has ever stepped off a plane in Honolulu, trading the brittle staleness of the aircraft cabin for the liquid Hawaiian breeze, warm and heavy with the scent of flowers, knows exactly what they meant.The selling of Hawaii as a land of gracious welcome works so well because it happens to be true. But for the members of one group, that has always evoked a bitter taste: native Hawaiians, the descendants of Polynesian voyagers who settled the islands in antiquity and lived there in isolation until the late 1700's. Ever since Captain Cook, the native Hawaiian story has been a litany of loss: loss of land and of a way of life, of population through sickness and disease, and of self-determination when United States marines toppled the monarchy in 1893.Over decades, the islands emerged as a vibrant multiracial society and the proud 50th state. Hawaiian culture -- language and art, religion and music -- has undergone a profound rebirth since the 1970's. But underneath this modern history remains a deep sense of dispossession among native Hawaiians, who make up about 20 percent of the population.Into the void has stepped Senator Daniel Akaka, the first native Hawaiian in Congress, who is the lead sponsor of a bill to extend federal recognition to native Hawaiians, giving them the rights of self-government as indigenous people that only American Indians and native Alaskans now enjoy. The Akaka bill has the support of Hawaii's Congressional delegation, the State Legislature and even its Republican governor, Linda Lingle. It will go before the Senate for a vote as soon as next week.The bill would allow native Hawaiians -- defined, in part, as anyone with indigenous ancestors living in the islands before the kingdom fell -- to elect a governing body that would negotiate with the federal government over land and other natural resources and assets. There is a lot of money and property at stake, including nearly two million acres of ''ceded lands,'' once owned by the monarchy; hundreds of thousands of acres set aside long ago for Hawaiian homesteaders; and hundreds of millions of dollars in entitlement programs.Much of what is now the responsibility of two state agencies, the Office of Hawaiian Affairs and the Department of Hawaiian Home Lands, would become the purview of the new government.There are many jurisdictional and procedural details to work out, but Mr. Akaka and others insist that the bill precludes radical outcomes.There would be no cash reparations, no new entitlements, no land grabs and especially no Indian-style casinos, which are a hot topic in Hawaii, one of only two states that outlaw all gambling.The bill's critics include those who see it as a race-based scheme to balkanize a racial paradise. On the other flank, radical Hawaiian groups say the bill undercuts their real dream: to take the 50th star off the flag and to create a government that does its negotiating with the State Department, not Interior.Mr. Akaka argues, convincingly, that beyond the bill's practical benefits in streamlining the management of assets and the flow of money, it is a crucial step in a long, slow process of reconciliation. As he sees it, Hawaii's cultural renaissance has exposed the unhealed wound in the native psyche. He has witnessed it in young people, more radical than their elders, as they adopt a tone of uncharacteristic hostility and resentment in sovereignty marches. He has noted a wariness that is at odds with the conciliatory mood struck in 1993, when President Bill Clinton signed a resolution apologizing for the kingdom's overthrow.Mr. Akaka says his bill offers vital encouragement to a group that makes up a disproportionate share of the islands' poor, sick, homeless and imprisoned, while steering a moderate course between extremes of agitation and apathy.The spirit of aloha, of gentle welcome, is the direct legacy of native culture and an incalculable gift the Hawaiian people have made to everyone who has ever traveled there -- wobbly-legged sailors and missionaries, dogged immigrants and sun-scorched tourists. The Akaka bill, with its first steps at long-deferred Hawaiian self-determination, seems like an obvious thing to give in return, an overdue measure of simple gratitude.Editorial ObserverYou'll be hearing a lot of vile, filthy and disgusting things about a movie called ''The Aristocrats'' in the coming weeks, because most of it is vile, filthy and disgusting. Though not in a bad way, exactly.It's a documentary about one old, very dirty joke, with comedians from the Stone Age (Phyllis Diller, Larry Storch) to the modern era (Jon Stewart, Bob Saget) telling it over and over while discussing its history and lore. The joke has been told since vaudeville days, though hardly ever in public. It's like a comedians' trade secret.I won't bore you with the joke's setup. The middle is too crude to repeat, and varies with the teller anyway, which is the joke's whole point. It's an improvised tale about a depraved family's unspeakable habits, piling up the sexual and scatological horrors until the tension-relieving, two-word punch line (''The Aristocrats!''). At this point the comedian's audience will either double over in hilarity or stare at him blankly.The movie opens July 29, in Los Angeles and New York, then in a few other cities. If you have only AMC theaters in your town, you're out of luck, because that chain -- soon to become the country's second largest -- won't show it. The limited release has less to do with the iron fist of censorship than with mass-market taste and media concentration. AMC and its competitors have done to movies what ConAgra has to farming, dispensing cinematic corn and soybeans to multiplexes across the continent and world. Small, strange films like ''The Aristocrats'' are shown mostly on America's coasts, at least until it's time for the DVD.So far, the film's executive producers, Paul Provenza and Penn Jillette, have refused to play martyr. They deserve thanks for that, and also for their movie. Once the repeated telling dulls you to the joke's repellent content (that may take a while), it becomes a master class in comedic timing and tactics.It's interesting to see the way the few women in the movie handle the joke -- some tell it straight, though halfheartedly, some skew it in hilariously inventive ways. With its forest of talking heads, the movie is also a sober warning about the bad things a life in comedy can do to your skin and hair.When you leave the theater, your brain will be scalded. But if you make it to the end, you'll get to hear the joke about the rabbi and the frog, which is funnier than practically everything else before it but isn't dirty at all.LAWRENCE DOWNESEditorial Notebook''Panhandle'' is one of those geographic terms, like ''tundra'' or ''mud flats,'' that are not well suited to selling real estate. It smacks of homelessness, or kitchen drudgery. As a signifier of mystery and romance, it vastly underachieves.But what about ''the Great Northwest''? As in: ''RiverCamps on Crooked Creek, a New Ruralist settlement in the Great Northwest.'' That's not just poetry -- it's a killer sales brochure. It sets the mind to basking in mountain sunshine, in a world of buffalo and sagebrush and stonewashed denim. Those lots would sell for sure.You should know, though, that this ''Great Northwest'' we speak of is in Florida. On the Panhandle. Or rather, it is the Panhandle, the largest chunk of unsprawled-upon real estate left in Florida, now that developers on the Atlantic and Gulf Coasts are practically choking on their own subdivisions.The St. Joe Company, Florida's largest private landowner, wants to sell huge portions of its 800,000 acres on the Panhandle. The trouble is, much of the property is inland, scrubby and hard to reach. Its woods and swamps are hot, sticky and full of bugs.That's where ''the Great Northwest'' and ''New Ruralism'' come in, joining ''rich Corinthian leather'' and ''Chilean sea bass'' on the evil-genius list of corporate coinages. ''New Ruralism'' is a particularly wily invention. Unlike ''New Urbanism,'' a philosophy that arose to oppose the cities' sprawl, ''New Ruralism'' was invented to move product. Or, as the St. Joe Company put it in a news release: '''New Ruralism' Diversifies Product Line, Adds Value to Rural Land Holdings.''The convergence of delusion and desire in sun-kissed Florida is as old as Ponce de Leon. The Marx Brothers joked about the Florida land boom as long ago as 1929, in ''The Cocoanuts.'' (''You can have any kind of a home you want,'' said Groucho, as a shady auctioneer. ''You can even get stucco. Oh, how you can get stucco.'') The worthless Florida lots hustled by desperate Chicago salesmen every night on Broadway come with the most alluring names: ''Glengarry Highlands'' and ''Glen Ross Farms.''St. Joe, through its meticulously designed and marketed faux-rural developments with names like RiverCamps, SummerCamp and WaterColor, is taking such salesmanship to a higher level. It isn't deceit, really. It's more the artful harnessing of consumer appetites to invent a more appealing reality.Groucho would have been impressed. He did, after all, try to pull pretty much the same trick in ''The Cocoanuts'':''Why, it's the most exclusive residential district in Florida,'' he said. ''Nobody lives there.''Editorial ObserverSome front-page news was mislaid in Wednesday's paper. It ran on Page 3 of the food section. It was the discovery by Mark Bittman, who writes the Minimalist cooking column, of the Fountain of Garlic, an overlooked source of fistfuls of cloves ready to roast, stew, slather and serve -- with no peeling. He threw out the old garlic-preparing equation -- quantity plus ambition divided by time -- that limited the number of cloves I was willing to crush and peel for any meal to about six. Mr. Bittman suddenly raised it to 40, 50 or even more.His insight is that peeled garlic in plastic jars is not what it looks like: a supermarket shortcut like prefab guacamole or ice-brick spinach. If the garlic is firm and shiny, he says, use it. You won't know the difference.Fountains of GarlicNot having a sous-chef, I had never dreamed of limitless garlic before. I don't know Mr. Bittman, but I like how he cooks. His goal is the simplest path to deliciousness, which strikes me as almost theology. That makes him my kitchen god.On Thursday I went to an Indian grocery and bought a jar of garlic. I braised 39 cloves in olive oil. They're gone. I'm going back for a five-pound jug. Mr. Bittman has found an express lane to a place close to heaven.LAWRENCE DOWNESIn the next week or so, if God lightens up and lets Chicago win its first World Series since 1917, who knows what else might happen? Last time it was the Russian Revolution, followed by a global flu pandemic. This time might be completely different. Packs of rabid wolves sweeping down from Canada, maybe. Sinkholes swallowing Nebraska. An asteroid.Whatever it is, it seems safe to say this: In half of the city -- the Cubs half -- nothing much will happen.Chicago's divided baseball loyalties -- Cubs vs. Sox, North Side vs. South Side, the oldest vs. the second-oldest championship droughts in baseball -- look quaint from a distance, like the rivalries that energize high school pep rallies or cause politicians to make lame wagers with one another on the TV news.But in Chicago, team affiliation is a form of ethnicity, passed on to sons and daughters like a genetic disease or silverware. You would think a city that never wins at baseball might suspend hostilities for the World Series, an event it sees roughly once every World War or Great Depression.But no. When the Sox and Houston Astros opened the Series last night at U.S. Cellular Field, the concentrations of people going bonkers were highly localized. Many in the larger, more visible Cubs tribe conspicuously went on with their lives. This reinforced the outward impression, at least, of a city that was handling the World Series like a really big trade convention -- accommodating the fuss, but not caring all that much.This is sad, especially when you consider the large-scale affection other teams enjoy. The Red Sox Nation covers all New England, from Maine down to the edges of Yankee territory in southwest Connecticut. The St. Louis Cardinals own the allegiance of several rectangular and trapezoidal states. In New York, the city is so big and playoff games so frequent that Met-Yankee tensions can be quite tolerable. Fans live and work side by side, and newspapers and TV stations are nonaligned.White Sox turf, by contrast, extends only a few square miles south from Madison Street in the Loop, through neighborhoods like Bridgeport and Hyde Park and into the south suburbs. The Cubs hold pretty much everything to the north, and much in the wide world beyond, thanks to their lucrative yuppie branding and the media hegemony of the Tribune Company, which owns the team, major TV and radio stations, and a big local newspaper.So you can forget the lofty example set by Abraham Lincoln (''A house divided against itself cannot stand''), Mayor Harold Washington (''Chicago is one city'') and Senator Barack Obama (''There is no conservative America and liberal America''). Many Chicagoans are down with Gov. Rod Blagojevich, who has said he ''bleeds Cubby blue'' and will not wear a Sox cap to a Series game.The Great Rift, as Mr. Obama, a White Sox fan, described it, has left the Sox and their fans feeling pretty much alone in a big, oblivious world -- baseball's Little Red Hen.''Who will help us win the division?''''Not I,'' said the North Side.''Who will help us sweep the Red Sox, eliminate the Angels, and polish off the Astros?''''Not I,'' said the North Side.''Then we will do it ourselves.''A World Series triumph may not happen, of course. Chicago has an old and sturdy tradition of losing, and the Astros are an impressive team. But if it does happen, you can't blame Sox fans if their celebration is invitation-only -- no bandwagons allowed.On that amazing night, when the cold wind whistles off Lake Michigan and rattles windows along the empty streets of Wrigleyville and Lincoln Park, where people are indoors making lattés or banking online or whatever it is Cubs fans do in October, the party on the South Side will go on and on. And that, it seems, will suit this strange, severed city just fine.Editorial ObserverThe suburbs, pretty as they may be, are nobody's idea of nature in balance. Sure, they are lush, green places where people and their vehicles get along with flowers, vegetables, songbirds and the littler mammals. But this harmony is enforced with an iron fist. It takes lots of chemicals, artificial irrigation and gas-powered trimming and mowing to keep such an arbitrary ecosystem under control.Leave it to nature to mount an insurgency against the tranquillity of the grass-and-pavement grid. Canada geese and white-tail deer are the most brazen intruders, multiplying beyond all reason and refusing to be subdued. The best-equipped predators, people, sidestepped the job, finding it distasteful. Instead they adjust their garden netting, check for ticks and brood about the tendency of their fallen Eden to keep collapsing into chaos.But what if that didn't always happen? What if Mother Nature decided not to run amok but to tidy up?Just such an amazing circumstance appears to be happening on the outskirts of Chicago. Research biologists there announced last month that they had stumbled across a possible answer to the problem of the proliferating suburban goose: the proliferating suburban coyote.The researchers belong to the Cook County Coyote Project, which has spent nearly six years studying the habits of more than 200 coyotes in the northern and western Chicago suburbs. Among other things, they tried to determine what the growing numbers of these beasts might have had to do with another puzzling development: the sudden end of the goose explosion. The local population of Canada geese had soared in the 1980's and 90's, but by 2000 the increase had slowed to about only 1 percent a year. An unknown predator was assumed to be the reason.The coyote was not an obvious suspect, being small and skulky and unlikely to stand up to a wrathful Canada goose. Examinations of coyote scat had seldom found damning traces of eggshell. But then infrared cameras exposed the coyote as a nest robber, one that carefully cracks open a goose egg and licks it clean.Evidence like this bolsters the conclusion that coyotes, in their own wily way, have become keystone predators in a land long emptied of wolves and mountain lions. The Cook County project's principal investigator, Prof. Stanley Gehrt of Ohio State University, speaks admiringly of his subjects, who have withstood more than 200 years of hunting, trapping and poisoning and are more entrenched in North America than ever. Every state but Hawaii has them. They have spread into suburbs and cities, forcing biologists to revise their definition of coyote habitat to this: Basically anywhere.Here is what is really strange: Humans have barely noticed. Egg-rustling, night-howling varmints are raising litters in storm drains, golf courses, parks and cemeteries. They are sometimes heard but seldom seen. In cities, they keep to themselves and work nights. There are coyotes, Professor Gehrt says, living in the Chicago Loop.You could call that sneaky. Or you could call it discreet. Professor Gehrt said that one surprising discovery of the study was how little danger the coyote poses to his unwitting human neighbors. ''The risk is quite low, as long as we don't monkey with their behavior,'' he said. If you assert yourself when you see one -- by yelling, cursing and throwing sticks -- it will respect your space and lie low. The coyote's tendency to avoid people -- and more important, raccoons -- has made rabies a nonissue, Professor Gehrt said, with only one case of coyote-to-human transmission ever recorded.Coyotes will behave, he said, as long as people do not feed them. Leave nothing tasty outside in an open trash can or food dish, and definitely nothing small and fluffy at the end of a leash. Professor Gehrt says with confidence that the sensible suburban toddler has little to fear from the suburban coyote, but he will not say the same for the suburban Shih Tzu.The Cook County Coyote Project is the largest and most comprehensive of its kind, but it is just one study. It is probably not the time to call for coyote subsidies and captive-breeding programs for goose-plagued subdivisions. But any effort to learn more about these creatures -- like a four-year coyote study being done in Westchester County by New York State and Cornell University -- is highly welcome. It is intriguing to consider the possibility that such a shunned, maligned animal may be a misunderstood hero. The suburbs could use well-mannered, responsible predators, and house cats are clearly not up to the job.Editorial ObserverPat Morita, the Japanese-American actor, died on Thanksgiving Day in Las Vegas. He was 73. News reports over the weekend were not specific about the cause of death or funeral details. Also not clear was what Hollywood would do now that Mr. Morita is gone.The movie and TV industry has never had many roles for Asian-American men, and it seemed for a while that they all went to Mr. Morita. He made his debut as ''Oriental No. 2'' in ''Thoroughly Modern Millie'' in 1967 and never stopped working. He hit two peaks -- as Arnold the diner owner on TV's ''Happy Days'' and the wise old Mr. Miyagi in the ''Karate Kid'' movies -- and spent the rest of nearly 40 years roaming an endless forest of bit parts.He was Mahi Mahi, the pidgin-talking cabby in ''Honeymoon in Vegas,'' Lamont Sanford's friend Ah Chew in ''Sanford and Son,'' Brian the waiter in ''Spy Hard,'' Chin Li the Chinese herbalist in ''The Karate Dog.''Whenever a script called for a little Asian guy to drive a taxi, serve drinks or utter wise aphorisms in amusingly broken English, you could count on Mr. Morita to be there.Those who knew Mr. Morita say he was a man of uncommon decency and good humor. He fulfilled the actor's prime directive, to keep busy.But it's distressing to think that the life's work of one of the best-known, hardest-working Asian-American actors is mostly a loose collection of servile supporting roles.I know nothing about Mr. Morita's ambitions; if he had a longing to interpret Eugene O'Neill on Broadway, I have not heard of it. But actors generally have to work within the range of what's available. And with Asian-Americans, particularly men, what's available generally stinks.Mr. Morita was one of the last survivors of a generation of Asian-American actors who toiled within a system that was interested only in the stock Asian. Harold Sakata played Oddjob in ''Goldfinger'' and was typecast as a mute brute forever after. Philip Ahn played houseboys and villains for decade upon decade.Some actors -- well, a couple -- broke out, like George Takei, Mr. Sulu in ''Star Trek,'' and Jack Soo on ''Barney Miller.'' B. D. Wong's role on ''Law & Order: Special Victims Unit'' is a major improvement, but it will be a long, long time before we erase the memory of the bucktoothed, jabbering Mickey Rooney in ''Breakfast at Tiffany's,'' or Sidney Toler as Charlie Chan.Watch Rob Schneider play Ula, a leering Hawaiian in the Adam Sandler movie ''50 First Dates,'' with a pidgin accent by way of Cheech and Chong, and you get the sense that Hollywood still believes that there is no ethnic caricature a white actor can't improve upon.Mr. Morita, who was born Noriyuki Morita to migrant farmworkers in California and was sent to an internment camp in Arizona during World War II, never gave the sense of bearing a racial burden.He had a comic's perspective and sense of humor, and would play his parts -- Chinese, Japanese, Korean, whatever -- with relaxed professionalism. As a standup comedian in the 1960's, he called himself ''the Hip Nip,'' and he once told a group of Pearl Harbor survivors in a Waikiki nightclub that he was sorry about messing up their harbor.Mr. Miyagi remains everybody's idea of a positive character. Who can forget ''wax on, wax off,'' his wise counsel linking car care to karate? But still, it bother me Miyagi-san so wise, but find so hard use articles, pronouns when talk.Mr. Morita's legacy may soon take a posthumous turn for the better. He has a role in an unreleased movie, ''Only the Brave,'' about Japanese-American soldiers of the famed 442nd Regimental Combat Team, one of the most decorated units in World War II. He plays a Buddhist priest who is imprisoned in Hawaii after Pearl Harbor.Lane Nishikawa, who wrote, directed, produced and acted in the film, which is now making the rounds of festivals in search of a distributor, said it told its story from the Asian-American point of view -- an unusual perspective, by past or current standards.With its wide pool of Asian-American talent, including Mr. Morita, Tamlyn Tomita and Jason Scott Lee, the film promises to be at least different from the other movie about the 442nd.That one --''Go for Broke!'' -- was made in 1951 and starred Van Johnson, with a large, and utterly forgotten, supporting cast.Editorial ObserverCorrection:  December 5, 2005, Monday  An Editorial Observer column last Tuesday about the death of the actor Pat Morita referred imprecisely to Rob Schneider's background. His mother is Filipino.The Catholic Worker movement has now officially lasted 25 years beyond the death of its founder, Dorothy Day, and looks sturdy enough to last another 25.There is something of a riddle in that. The harsh rules that limit the shelf lives of utopian impulses would seem to spell doom for an institution as shapeless and impractical as Day's. Lots of organizations want to lift up the poor, oppose war and reshape society, but few try to do so with no governing structure, no official means of support, no paid staff members and -- since Day's death on Nov. 29, 1980 -- no leader.That oddity was on full display last week on the Lower East Side, where about 80 people -- Catholic Worker members and former members, and their relatives and friends -- gathered in a cramped, dingy auditorium at Maryhouse, the group's home for women on East Third Street, to celebrate a Mass in Day's memory.The stage was closed off with white bedsheets draped on a string. Down in front, between a lectern and a Yamaha keyboard, a potted ficus and a table lamp gave the makeshift sanctuary the feeling of a living room. Pictures of Woody Guthrie, Gandhi and Martin Luther King Jr. lined the walls. There was lots of rumpled gray hair and baggy overcoats, women in turtlenecks and men with canes, a few young couples, a child or two.The motley gathering was at the literal center of commemorations for Day, the Greenwich Village bohemian and journalist who converted to Catholicism and founded the Catholic Worker in 1933 with a fellow radical, Peter Maurin. She spent her final years at Maryhouse, leaving behind a mountain of writings but not much else in the way of stuff or structure. Her movement has been called not an organization but an organism, an anarchic experiment whose most improbable achievement may be its own survival.Members still dedicate themselves to voluntary poverty, nonviolence and hard work. They make soup, give away coats, visit prisoners and the sick, protest against war and publish a newspaper that sells, as it did in the 1930's, for a penny.Through some process of spontaneous generation, Catholic Worker houses have sprung up in cities and rural areas across the country and in Canada and Europe. In keeping with Day's pacifism and cranky independence, the group has no income, so sends no taxes to the military. It is not a registered nonprofit. It has no official connection to the Catholic Church, even though Day herself is now a candidate for sainthood.What she would have thought of that is a matter of debate. ''Don't call me a saint,'' she once said. ''I don't want to be dismissed that easily.''One member, Matt Vogel, 26, helped me sort out the Catholic Worker puzzle over coffee in the dining room at St. Joseph House. As he smoked, a man behind him with powerful forearms pummeled a mountain of ground beef into that evening's meatloaf.Mr. Vogel said the place worked because it stayed small -- about 30 people, both street people and volunteers, live in each house, sharing food and chores. Prayers and meetings are optional, and being Catholic or even Christian is not required.I said it was remarkable that the members could live peaceably not only beside one another, but also beside the larger Catholic Church, an institution without a lot of official friendliness for radical politics these days. The Catholic Worker largely avoids the temporal fray, Mr. Vogel said, because it focuses so relentlessly on the personal and the particular.Mr. Vogel did not seem all that radical, or terribly impressed with himself. He did not see fit to mention, for example, that the following week would find him in Cuba with about 25 other people, most from Catholic Worker houses across the country, taking part in a march from Santiago de Cuba to the gates of Guantánamo Bay to protest the treatment of the terrorism-war detainees.The marchers arrived on Monday and plan to reach the United States Navy base and prison on Saturday, International Human Rights Day. They say they will ask to visit hunger-striking prisoners. If that request is refused, they will fast and conduct a vigil for the immediate abolition of torture by all nations.Given the deadly urgency of the Bush administration's war on terror, the notion of going to Cuba to offer comfort to prisoners in that war seems at least quixotic. But to the Catholic Workers of the world, it comes with the job.''We don't always take scripture literally,'' Mr. Vogel said, ''but we do take it seriously.''Editorial ObserverHow odd to see the assembled forces of mass culture buzzing so furiously around an object as sorrowful and naked as Joan Didion's new book, ''The Year of Magical Thinking.'' The book, a slender memoir of suffering, retraces Ms. Didion's forced march through grief after the death of her husband, John Gregory Dunne, and the severe illness of their daughter, Quintana Roo, in 2003. It is meticulous and honest, and has been enthusiastically reviewed.But good press alone cannot explain what has happened in the mere two months since ''The Year of Magical Thinking'' appeared. It has already sold 200,000 copies, more than any other Didion hardcover. Newspaper and magazine articles and TV shows have approached it in a spirit of reverent intoxication. It won a National Book Award and even had a cameo on the TV series ''Commander in Chief,'' seen in the hands of the president's mother. On Tuesday The Times declared the book a ''cultural touchstone'' and said it was headed to Broadway. Ms. Didion herself would adapt it.It is both amazing and unnerving to see the public consciousness so thoroughly saturated with a story as intimate and personal as Ms. Didion's. It is one thing to share her dreadful journey as her silent companion in a book. It seems quite another to see the trip become a public rite, with full-page newspaper ads inviting everyone to come along, or to contemplate strangers making chitchat about it day after day in line at TKTS, or on the theater sidewalk under the gushy blurb signs.But that's the baby boom for you. This vast American cohort has exhaustively explored life's other big themes: love and sex, work and child care. Now, inevitably, boomers are watching loved ones die, and confronting their own fragility. Assuming that Ms. Didion has struck a generational chord -- think of that huge one on the piano at the end of ''A Day in the Life'' -- it seems fair to expect a melancholy river of death-themed books, plays and movies until the last of the baby boomers follow their predecessors into the grave.This could be a very good thing. It has been more than 40 years since Jessica Mitford wrote ''The American Way of Death,'' and society still has not overcome its squeamish denial of death's existence. ''The Year of Magical Thinking'' is unflinching about both the torturous mechanisms of dying -- with its E.M.T.'s, IV's and I.C.U.'s -- and the damage it inflicts on the mind of the bereaved. By sharing her own sliver of a universal experience, Ms. Didion is helping to peel away a mystery. The power propelling her beautiful little book seems far removed from mere prurience or mass marketing. It seems like simple gratitude.LAWRENCE DOWNESEditorial NotebookOf all the dumb teen movies in the constantly expanding dumb-teen-movie universe, ''The Ringer'' may be the most cautiously constructed and the most anxiously calibrated, the one with the greatest number of good intentions folded into the lumpy batter of its rude and simple plot.That may not make it the most worthy, but it certainly makes it worth thinking about. It's the story of a guy who fakes being retarded so he can rig the Special Olympics. It features about 170 mentally disabled actors and extras, including a dozen or so with speaking parts. This qualifies it as a legitimate groundbreaker because it is hard to think of any other nondocumentary that gives as much screen time to real people with mental disabilities, or makes mental retardation such an integral part of the story and the jokes.There have always been mentally challenged characters in movies, of course, but from ''Of Mice and Men'' to ''Charly'' and ''I Am Sam,'' these have generally been played by nondisabled actors chewing the scenery in search of pitying tears or heart warmth. ''The Ringer'' is not that kind of disability picture. It's a mainstream comedy, released over the Christmas weekend and aimed squarely at the PG-13 demographic.The star is Johnny Knoxville of the TV series ''Jackass.'' The producers include Peter and Bobby Farrelly, who brought you ''Kingpin'' and ''Dumb and Dumber.'' So it's fair to ask whether two filmmakers who got rich and famous with movies about morons can make one with real retarded people without crossing some inviolable line of taste and taboo.If so, they tried very, very hard not to. Peter Farrelly said he'd spent six years working on ''The Ringer,'' enduring what sounds like a hazing by the Special Olympics board, and a tongue-lashing from Eunice Kennedy Shriver herself, for giving a retarded character violent tendencies in ''There's Something About Mary.''The effort paid off with a movie that the Special Olympics has officially endorsed. Its chairman, Timothy Shriver, has suggested that doing so was audacious or even reckless, given the Farrellys' reputation, but in truth the movie was carefully scrubbed. It masquerades as a witless shocker, but reflects up-to-the-minute sensitivities about mental disabilities, is exquisitely sparing in its use of words like ''retard'' and dispenses an explicit message of tolerance along with its severed-finger jokes and curse words.The point is so obvious that even teenage boys will get it -- which is the whole idea, says Mr. Shriver, who is also an executive producer of the film.Judging from a screening I went to, the most appreciative audience for ''The Ringer'' will be those who know the subject best: mentally disabled people and their families. My two oldest brothers, Paul and Peter, were in the Special Olympics years ago, and my own cackles -- the movie has some pretty funny moments -- were sweetened with the bliss of recognition.It was strange to see retarded people just being themselves -- the screen full of wonky faces and waggling arms, with characters who were definitely slow on the uptake and unsullied by vanity or irony. In a scene in a theater, the camera slowly observes a group of athletes, their upturned faces rapt or shiny with tears as Jennifer Grey -- the movie is ''Dirty Dancing'' -- pours out her love troubles. I liked that.Just to see a variety of personality types among the Special Olympians -- a nerdy guy, a self-absorbed jock, a lame jokester -- seemed to me a big achievement. It was as if the Farrellys had found a box of human experience that had never been opened -- not in the multiplex, anyway.But I'm not tempted to go overboard with gratitude. If you accept the possibility of progress in mental-disability movies, ''The Ringer'' is still firmly set in what you might call the Sidney Poitier phase, in which the mentally disabled are depicted as better than the rest of us: inherently decent, devoted and lovable. An important plot point in ''The Ringer'' involves Special Olympians at a track event stopping to help a fellow runner who stumbles. Apparently this happened in real life, but most Special Olympians I know would have kept running. They may be kindhearted, but they're not stupid.Maybe that gingerly touch will be gone in the sequel. The Farrellys have worked an impressive number of disabled characters into their movies over the years, avoiding condescension or false pity, and they show no signs of stopping. Peter Farrelly told me he hoped that once the novelty of ''The Ringer'' faded, it would eventually seem dated, and the fuss about it embarrassing.How soon that will happen, of course, is the big question. Hollywood likes to humanize things -- earlier this year it was parental penguins, then a loving gorilla. It should not be seen as such a giant step to humanize humans, but that's the world we live in.Editorial Observer