thomas l. friedman
Each day we get closer to the Iraqi elections, more voices are suggesting that they be postponed. This is a tough call, but I hope the elections go ahead as scheduled on Jan. 30. We have to have a proper election in Iraq so we can have a proper civil war there.Let me explain: None of these Arab countries -- Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Saudi Arabia -- are based on voluntary social contracts between the citizens inside their borders. They are all what others have called ''tribes with flags'' -- not real countries in the Western sense. They are all civil wars either waiting to happen or being restrained from happening by the iron fist of one tribe over the others or, in the case of Syria in Lebanon, by one country over another.What the Bush team has done in Iraq, by ousting Saddam, was not to ''liberate'' the country -- an image and language imported from the West and inappropriate for Iraq -- but rather to unleash the latent civil war in that country. Think of shaking a bottle of Champagne and then uncorking it.This is not to say that the ''liberation'' of Iraq's people is impossible. But unlike in Eastern Europe -- where a democratic majority was already present and crying to get out, and all we needed to do was remove the wall -- in Iraq we first need to create that democratic majority.That is what these elections are about and why they are so crucial. We don't want the kind of civil war that we have in Iraq now. That is a war of Sunni and Islamist militants against the U.S. and its Iraqi allies, many of whom do not seem comfortable fighting with, and seemingly for, the U.S. America cannot win that war. That is a civil war in which the murderous insurgents appear to be on the side of ending the U.S. ''occupation of Iraq'' and the U.S. and its allies appear to be about sustaining that occupation.The civil war we want is a democratically elected Iraqi government against the Baathist and Islamist militants. It needs to be clear that these so-called insurgents are not fighting to liberate Iraq from America, but rather to reassert the tyranny of a Sunni-Baathist minority over the majority there. The insurgents are clearly desperate that they not be cast as fighting a democratically elected Iraqi government -- which is why they are desperately trying to scuttle the elections. After all, if all they wanted was their fair share of the pie, and nothing more, they would be taking part in the elections.We cannot liberate Iraq, and never could. Only Iraqis can liberate themselves, by first forging a social contract for sharing power and then having the will to go out and defend that compact against the minorities who will try to resist it. Elections are necessary for that process to unfold, but not sufficient. There has to be the will -- among Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds -- to forge that equitable social contract and then fight for it.In short, we need these elections in Iraq to see if there really is a self-governing community there ready, and willing, to liberate itself -- both from Iraq's old regime and from us. The answer to this question is not self-evident. This was always a shot in the dark -- but one that I would argue was morally and strategically worth trying.Because if it is impossible for the peoples of even one Arab state to voluntarily organize themselves around a social contract for democratic life, then we are looking at dictators and kings ruling this region as far as the eye can see. And that will guarantee that this region will be a cauldron of oil-financed pathologies and terrorism for the rest of our lives.What is inexcusable is thinking that such an experiment would be easy, that it could be done on the cheap, that it could be done with any old army and any old coalition and any old fiscal policy and any old energy policy. That is the foolishness of George W. Bush, Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld. My foolishness was thinking they could never be so foolish.Still, the game is not over. We know that the Iraqi people do not want to be ruled by us. But what we don't know is how they want to rule themselves. What kind of majority are the Iraqi Shiites ready to be -- a tolerant and inclusive one, or an intolerant and exclusive one? What kind of minority do the Iraqi Sunnis intend to be -- rebellious and separatist, or loyal and sharing?Elections are the only way to find out. Or, as Rumsfeld might say: You go to elections with the country you've got, not the one you wish you had -- because that is the only way to find out whether the one you wish for is ever possible.Op-Ed ColumnistAfter Saddam Hussein seized neighboring Kuwait in 1990, the historian David Fromkin published an essay in the Smithsonian journal recalling how the modern Middle East was formed, in which he wrote: ''In 1922, Churchill succeeded in mapping out the Arab Middle East along lines suitable to the needs of the British civilian and military administrations. T.E. Lawrence [''Lawrence of Arabia''] would later brag that he, Churchill and a few others had designed the modern Middle East over dinner. Seventy years later the question is whether the peoples of the Middle East are willing or able to continue living with that design.''That same question is still on the table today -- but even more so. What is happening right now in Iraq, Israel and Palestine is a new Churchillian moment. The contours and contents of these core Middle East regions are up for grabs, only this time these contours are not being redrawn by an imperial pen from above -- and will not be. This time they are being shaped by three civilian conflicts bubbling up from below -- among Palestinians, Israelis and Iraqis. As the Israeli political theorist Yaron Ezrahi puts it, ''Three volcanoes are erupting at the same time. Lava is pouring out of each of them, and we are all waiting to see how it cools and into what forms.''Like the recent tsunami, this sort of tectonic movement of geopolitical plates happens only once a century. This is a remarkable political moment that you don't want to miss or see go badly. But that's what's scary; when borders and states emerge from volcanic activity, anything can happen. What all three of these cases have in common is that they pit theocratic, fascist and messianic forces on one side, claiming to be acting on the will of God or in the name of the primordial aspirations of ''the nation,'' against more moderate, tolerant, democratizing majorities.In Israel the theocratic-nationalist settler movement has already begun to make its move. Last Thursday, four battalion commanders and 30 other officers, all residents of West Bank Jewish settlements, published a statement in the Israeli daily Yediot Aharonot, declaring that they would not obey any orders to evacuate Jewish enclaves in Gaza or the West Bank. This is an open rebuke of Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's cabinet-approved plan to withdraw all Israeli forces and settlements from Gaza and a small part of the West Bank.The Israeli daily Haaretz also reported that the main council of West Bank and Gaza rabbis issued a statement Thursday urging all Israeli soldiers to openly defy the state and declare their opposition to the disengagement plan, saying: ''The order to dismantle settlements goes against the laws of the Torah and human morality. One should not assist this act.'' The Haaretz columnist Akiva Eldar reported that thousands of Jewish zealots -- and Christians, too -- are waiting in the United States for the call to join the struggle alongside the settlers in Gaza.Sound familiar? It should. The week before, the Muslim militant group Ansar al-Sunna in Iraq called for all Iraqi Muslims to boycott Iraq's voting booths, decrying them as ''centers of atheism,'' and added the warning that ''the Mujahedeen will be attacking polling stations.'' Hamas and Islamic Jihad are boycotting today's Palestinian election, just as the main Sunni political movement in Iraq, the Iraqi Islamic Party, has vowed to do there. Osama bin Laden, for his part, declared that the laws of Iraq are ''infidel'' laws, and ''therefore everyone who participates in this election will be considered infidels.''I do not believe that these militant messianists can actually win in Iraq, Israel or Palestine, but they can prevent the majorities in each country from forging any new pragmatic, tolerant power-sharing arrangements -- and in the case of Israelis and Palestinians, new borders. Mr. Sharon is the strongest prime minister Israel could have right now, but even he is having problems pulling off this self-amputation of the Gaza Strip.The contours of the Middle East in the 21st century are at stake here, much as they were in 1922. If the pragmatic forces can dominate in Israel, Iraq and Palestine, it will establish positive examples that will give others in the region the incentive and confidence to try to emulate them. If all three remain roiling volcanoes, slowly devouring themselves, the social contract among Jews that the state of Israel was built upon will start to come unstuck, and Iraq and Palestine will be held up as exhibits A and B for the case that in the Arab world, states can only be stabilized by despotism, never democracy.Op-Ed ColumnistIn trying to think through whether we should press ahead with elections in Iraq or not, I have found it useful to go back and dig out my basic rules for Middle East reporting, which I have developed and adapted over 25 years of writing from that region.Rule 1 -- Never lead your story out of Lebanon, Gaza or Iraq with a cease-fire; it will always be over by the time the next morning's paper is out.Rule 2 -- Never take a concession, except out of the mouth of the person who is supposed to be doing the conceding. If I had a dime for every time someone agreed to recognize Israel on behalf of Yasir Arafat, I would be a wealthy man today.Rule 3 -- The Israelis will always win, and the Palestinians will always make sure that they never enjoy it. Everything else is just commentary.Rule 4 -- In the Middle East, if you can't explain something with a conspiracy theory, then don't try to explain it at all -- people there won't believe it.Rule 5 -- In the Middle East, the extremists go all the way, and the moderates tend to just go away -- unless the coast is completely clear.Rule 6 -- The most oft-used phrase of Mideast moderates is: ''We were just about to stand up to the bad guys when you stupid Americans did that stupid thing. Had you stupid Americans not done that stupid thing, we would have stood up, but now it's too late. It's all your fault for being so stupid.''Rule 7 -- In Middle East politics there is rarely a happy medium. When one side is weak, it will tell you, ''How can I compromise?'' And the minute it becomes strong, it will tell you, ''Why should I compromise?''Rule 8 -- What people tell you in private in the Middle East is irrelevant. All that matters is what they will defend in public in Arabic, in Hebrew or in any other local language. Anything said in English doesn't count.It is on the basis of these rules that I totally disagree with those who argue that the Jan. 30 Iraqi elections should be postponed. Their main argument is that an Iraqi election that ensconces the Shiite majority in power, without any participation of the Sunni minority, will sow the seeds of civil war.That is probably true -- but we are already in a civil war in Iraq. That civil war was started by the Sunni Baathists, and their Islamist fascist allies from around the region, the minute the U.S. toppled Saddam. And they started that war not because they felt the Iraqi elections were going to be rigged, but because they knew they weren't going to be rigged.They started the war not to get their fair share of Iraqi power, but in hopes of retaining their unfair share. Under Saddam, Iraq's Sunni minority, with only 20 percent of the population, ruled everyone. These fascist insurgents have never given politics a chance to work in Iraq because they don't want it to work. That's why they have never issued a list of demands. They don't want people to see what they are really after, which is continued minority rule, Saddamism without Saddam. If that was my politics, I'd be wearing a ski mask over my head, too.The notion that delaying the elections for a few months would somehow give time for the ''Sunni moderates'' to persuade the extremists to come around is dead wrong -- literally. Any delay would simply embolden the guys with the guns to kill more Iraqi police officers and to intimidate more Sunnis. It could only convince them that with just a little more violence, they could scuttle the whole project of rebuilding Iraq.There is only one thing that will enable the Sunni moderates in Iraq to win the debate, and that is when the fascist insurgents are forced to confront the fact that their tactics have not only failed to prevent the elections, but have also dug the Sunnis of Iraq into an even deeper hole.By boycotting the elections, not only will they lose their unfair share of the old Iraq, they will also have failed to claim even their fair share of the new Iraq. The moderate argument among the Sunnis can prevail only when the tactics of their extremists have proved utterly bankrupt.For all these reasons, the least bad option right now for the U.S. is to forge ahead with the elections -- unless the Iraqi Shiites ask for a postponement -- and focus all of America's energies not on appeasing the fascist insurgents, but on moderating the Shiites and Kurds, who are sure to dominate the voting.Despite my seventh rule, we have a much greater chance of producing a decent outcome in Iraq by appealing to the self-interest of the Kurds and the Shiites to be magnanimous in victory, then we do of getting the fascist insurgents to be magnanimous in defeat.Op-Ed ColumnistIn the wake of U.S. aid to help Muslim and other victims of the recent tsunami, Colin Powell suggested that maybe, now that the Muslim world had seen ''American generosity'' and ''American values in action,'' it wouldn't be so hostile to America.Don't hold your breath waiting for a thank-you card. If the fact that American soldiers have risked their lives to save the Muslims of Bosnia, the Muslims of Kuwait, the Muslims of Somalia, the Muslims of Afghanistan and the Muslims of Iraq has earned the U.S. only the false accusation of being ''anti-Muslim,'' trust me, U.S. troops passing out bottled water and Pop-Tarts in Indonesia are not going to erase that lie. It is not an exaggeration to say that, if you throw in the Oslo peace process, U.S. foreign policy for the last 15 years has been dominated by an effort to save Muslims -- not from tsunamis, but from tyrannies, mostly their own theocratic or autocratic regimes.It clearly has not made much of an impression. So you will pardon me if I say that I don't care whether the state media in Saudi Arabia -- whose government gave far less to the Muslim tsunami victims ($30 million) than the amount spent by King Fahd's entourage on his last two vacations in Marbella (reportedly $100 million) -- say nice things about us.I believe the tensions between us and the Muslim world stem primarily from the conditions under which many Muslims live, not what we do. I believe free people, living under freely elected governments, with a free press and with economies and education systems that enable their young people to achieve their full potential, don't spend a lot of time thinking about who to hate, who to blame, and who to lash out at. Free countries don't have leaders who use their media and state-owned ''intellectuals'' to deflect all of their people's anger away from them and onto America.Ah, you say, but the Europeans live in free-market democracies and they have become very anti-American. Yes, some of them. But for Europeans, anti-Americanism is a hobby. For too many in the Muslim world it has become a career.I am sure that young Taiwanese, young Koreans, young Japanese, young Poles and young Indians have their views on America, but they are not an obsession. They want our jobs, not our lives. They live in societies that empower their young people to realize their full potential and to express any opinion -- pro-American, anti-American or neutral.So I don't want young Muslims to like us. I want them to like and respect themselves, their own countries and their own governments. I want them to have the same luxury to ignore America as young Taiwanese have -- because they are too busy focusing on improving their own lives and governance, running for office, studying anything they want or finding good jobs in their own countries.The Bush team is certainly not fostering all this when it mismanages a war it launched to liberate the people of Iraq. Its performance has been pathetic, and I understand anyone on the right or the left who wants to wash his hands of the whole thing. Speaking personally, though, I am still hoping that these Iraqi elections come off -- out of respect for the Iraqis who have been ready to risk their lives for a chance to vote, out of contempt for the insurgents who want to prevent that and out of a deep conviction that something very important is at stake.No, these elections won't change Iraq or the region overnight, and Thomas Jefferson is not on the ballot. But they will at least kick off what the Iraq expert Yitzhak Nakash calls ''a real, Iraqi political process run by and for Iraqis.''That Iraqi political process ''has to begin now to enable the U.S. to get out sooner rather than later,'' added Mr. Nakash, a Brandeis professor and currently a fellow at the Woodrow Wilson International Center. ''The U.S. must go ahead with the elections in Iraq, accept the likelihood that Shiites and Kurds will do well, and leave the door open to Sunnis to join as partners in writing the Iraqi constitution. We want a system there that answers to the aspirations of Iraqis, not Americans. That is the key to a legitimate Iraqi government.''Before the war, I said of Iraq, ''We break it, we own it.'' Today, my motto is, ''If they own it, they'll fix it.'' America's standing in the Muslim world will improve, not when we get a better message, but when they have more control. People with the responsibility and opportunity to run their own lives focus on their own lives -- not on us. More of that would be a very good thing.Op-Ed ColumnistWatching George Bush's second inaugural from a bistro in Paris is like watching the Red Sox win the World Series from a sports bar in New York City. Odds are that someone around you is celebrating -- I mean, someone, somewhere in Europe must be happy about this -- but it's not obvious.Why are Europeans so blue over George Bush's re-election? Because Europe is the world's biggest ''blue state.'' This whole region is a rhapsody in blue. These days, even the small group of anti-anti-Americans in the European Union is uncomfortable being associated with Mr. Bush. There are Euro-conservatives, but, aside from, maybe, the ruling party in Italy, there is nothing here that quite corresponds to the anti-abortion, anti-gay, anti-tax, anti-national-health-care, anti-Kyoto, openly religious, pro-Iraq-war Bush Republican Party.If you took all three major parties in Britain -- Labor, Liberals and Conservatives -- ''their views on God, guns, gays, the death penalty, national health care and the environment would all fit somewhere inside the Democratic Party,'' said James Rubin, the Clinton State Department spokesman, who works in London. ''That's why I get along with all three parties here. They're all Democrats!''While officially every European government is welcoming the inauguration of President Bush, the prevailing mood on the continent (if I may engage in a ridiculously sweeping generalization!) still seems to be one of shock and awe that Americans actually re-elected this man.Before Mr. Bush's re-election, the prevailing attitude in Europe was definitely: ''We're not anti-American. We're anti-Bush.'' But now that the American people have voted to re-elect Mr. Bush, Europe has a problem maintaining this distinction. The logic of the Europeans' position is that they should now be anti-American, not just anti-Bush, but most Europeans don't seem to want to go there. They know America is more complex. So there is a vague hope in the air that when Mr. Bush visits Europe next month, he'll come bearing an olive branch that will enable both sides to at least pretend to hold this loveless marriage together for the sake of the kids.''Europeans were convinced that Kerry had won on election night and were telling themselves that they knew all along that Americans were not all that bad -- and then suddenly, as the truth emerged, there was a feeling of slow resignation: 'Oh well, we've been dreaming,''' said Dominique Moisi, one of France's top foreign policy analysts. ''In fact, real America is moving away from us. We don't share the same values. In France it was a very emotional issue. It was as if Americans were voting for the president of France as much as for president of the United States.''That sense that America is now so powerful that it influences everyone else's politics more than their own governments -- so everyone wants to vote in our elections -- is something you hear more and more these days.Elizabeth Angell, a 23-year-old American studying at Oxford, told me that a Pakistani friend at school had asked her if he could just watch her fill out her absentee ballot for the U.S. election. ''He said to me, 'It's the closest thing I am going to get to voting. I wish I could vote in your election because your government affects my daily life more than my own.'''The one concrete result of the U.S. election will probably be to reinforce Europe's focus on its own efforts to build a United States of Europe, and to further play down the trans-Atlantic alliance. ''When it comes to emotions, the re-election of Bush has reinforced the feeling of alienation between Europe and the U.S.,'' Mr. Moisi said. ''It is not that we are so much against America, it is that we cannot understand the evolution of that country. This election has weakened the concept of 'the West.'''Funnily enough, the one country on this side of the ocean that would have elected Mr. Bush is not in Europe, but the Middle East: it's Iran, where many young people apparently hunger for Mr. Bush to remove their despotic leaders, the way he did in Iraq.An Oxford student who had just returned from research in Iran told me that young Iranians were ''loving anything their government hates,'' such as Mr. Bush, ''and hating anything their government loves.'' Tehran is festooned in ''Down With America'' graffiti, the student said, but when he tried to take pictures of it, the Iranian students he was with urged him not to. They said it was just put there by their government and was not how most Iranians felt.Iran, he said, is the ultimate ''red state.'' Go figure.Op-Ed ColumnistThere's only one thing you can say about the elections in Iraq: They are either going to be the end of the beginning there or the beginning of the end.Either Iraqis turn out in large numbers to take control of their own future and write their own constitution -- and I think they will -- or the fascist insurgents there prevent them from doing so, in which case the Bush team will have to move to Plan B. What's sad is that right when we have reached crunch time in Iraq, the West is totally divided. All that the Europeans care about is being able to say to George Bush, ''We told you so.'' What happens the morning after ''We told you so'' ? Well, the Europeans don't have a Plan B either.Ever since 9/11, I've argued the war on terrorism is really a war of ideas within the Muslim world -- a war between those who want to wall Islam off from modernity, and defend it with a suicide cult, and those who want to bring Islam into the 21st century and preserve it as a compassionate faith. This war of ideas is not one that the West can fight, only promote. Muslims have to fight it from within. That is what is at stake in the Iraqi elections. This is the first great battle in the post-9/11 war of ideas.This war also can't be won with troops -- only with turnout. This is a war between Iraqi voters and insurgents -- ballots versus bullets. And the people who understand that best are the fascist insurgents. That is why they are not focusing their attacks on U.S. troops, but on Iraqi election workers, candidates, local officials and police. The insurgents have one credo: ''Iraqis must not vote -- there must be no authentic expression of the people's will for a modern, decent Iraq. Because, if there is, the world will see that this is not a war between Muslims and infidel occupiers, but between Muslims with bad ideas and Muslims with progressive ideas.''And at this key juncture the West stands disunited. Condi Rice told the Senate that the ''time for diplomacy is now.'' Give me a break. The time for diplomacy was two years ago. We would be so much better off now if the entire European Union was actively urging Iraqis to vote, and using its own moral legitimacy in the Arab world to delegitimize the insurgents. The divided West is a real liability.''The most important threat [to the West] is Islamic terrorism,'' said Bernard Kouchner, the founder of Doctors Without Borders, and one of the few French intellectuals to support the ouster of Saddam. This is not a war with the Muslim religion, he stressed, but with a violent ''fascist'' Muslim minority. ''We [in the West] have always been allied against fascism since the Second World War,'' he said. ''We have to be together, America and Europe, because our enemies are the same, Muslim extremism and fascism,'' but right now, unlike in Bosnia, ''we are apart.''Mr. Kouchner blames Paris for having been too quick to threaten a U.N. veto and blames even more the Bush team for having been too quick to go to war without a real U.N. alliance, and for mismanaging postwar Iraq. At least he cares. Most of his countrymen, I sense, are hoping Mr. Bush will fail in Iraq so that the ends will never justify his unilateral means. It's quite amazing, when you consider that Europe, with its large Muslim minorities, needs the moderates to win the war of ideas within Islam so much more than America.I spent Friday morning interviewing two 18-year-old French Muslim girls in the Paris immigrant district of St.-Ouen. (It is about a mile from the school where in March 2003 a French Muslim girl, who had refused the veil and rebuffed the advances of a Muslim boy, was thrown into a garbage can by three Muslim teenagers, who then tossed lighted cigarette butts into the can and closed the lid.)Both girls I interviewed wore veils and one also wore a full Afghan-like head-to-toe covering; one was of Egyptian parents, the other of Tunisian parents, but both were born and raised in France. What did I learn from them? That they got all their news from Al Jazeera TV, because they did not believe French TV, that the person they admired most in the world was Osama bin Laden, because he was defending Islam, that suicide ''martyrdom'' was justified because there was no greater glory than dying in defense of Islam, that they saw themselves as Muslims first and French citizens last, and that all their friends felt pretty much the same.We were not in Kabul. We were standing outside their French public high school -- a short ride from the Eiffel Tower.Op-Ed ColumnistHaving spent the last 10 days traveling to Britain, France, Germany and Switzerland, I have one small suggestion for President Bush. I suggest that when he comes to Europe to mend fences next month he give only one speech. It should be at his first stop in Brussels and it should consist of basically three words: ''Read my ears.''Let me put this as bluntly as I can: There is nothing that the Europeans want to hear from George Bush, there is nothing that they will listen to from George Bush that will change their minds about him or the Iraq war or U.S. foreign policy. Mr. Bush is more widely and deeply disliked in Europe than any U.S. president in history. Some people here must have a good thing to say about him, but I haven't met them yet.In such an environment, the only thing that Mr. Bush could do to change people's minds about him would be to travel across Europe and not say a single word -- but just listen. If he did that, Mr. Bush would bowl the Europeans over. He would absolutely disarm and flummox people here -- and improve his own image markedly. All it would take for him would be just a few words: ''Read my ears. I have come to Europe to listen, not to speak. I will give my Europe speech when I come home -- after I've heard what you have to say.''If Mr. Bush did that none of the European pundits would be able to pick apart his speeches here and mock the contradictions between his words and deeds. None of them would comment on his delivery and what he failed to mention. Instead, all the European commentators, politicians and demonstrators would start fighting with one another over what to say to the president. It might even force the Europeans to get out of their bad habit of just saying, ''George Bush,'' and everybody laughing or sneering as if that ends the conversation, and Europe doesn't have to declare what it stands for.Listening is also a sign of respect. It is a sign that you actually value what the other person might have to say. If you just listen to someone first, it is amazing how much they will listen to you back. Most Europeans, though, are convinced that George Bush is deaf -- that he cannot listen or hear. Just proving that he is not deaf, and therefore the Europeans don't have to shout, would do wonders for Mr. Bush's standing.What would Mr. Bush hear? Some of it is classic Eurowhining, easily dismissible. But some of it is very heartfelt, even touching. I heard it while doing interviews at the Pony Club, a trendy bar/beauty parlor in East Berlin. And more and more I think it explains why many Europeans dislike Mr. Bush so intensely. It's this: Europeans love to make fun of naïve American optimism, but deep down, they envy it and they want America to be that open, foreigner-embracing, carefree, goofily enthusiastic place that cynical old Europe can never be. Many young Europeans blame Mr. Bush for making America, since 9/11, into a strange new land that exports fear more than hope, and has become dark and brooding -- a place whose greeting to visitors has gone from ''Give me your tired, your poor'' to ''Give me your fingerprints.'' They look at Mr. Bush as someone who stole something precious from them.Tim Kreutzfeldt, the bar owner, said to me: ''Bush took away our America. I mean we love America. We are very sad about America. We believe in America and American values, but not in Bush. And it makes us angry that he distorted our image of the country which is so important to us. It is not what America stands for -- and this makes us angry and it should make every American angry, because America lost so much in its reputation worldwide.'' The Bush team, he added, is giving everyone in the world the impression that ''somebody is coming to kill you.''Stefan Elfenbein, a food critic nursing a beer at our table, added: ''I know many people who don't want to travel to America anymore. People are afraid to be hassled at the border. We all discuss it, when somebody goes to America [we now ask:] 'Are you sure?' We had hope that Kerry would win and would make a statement, 'America is back to what it was four years ago.' We hoped that he would be the symbol, the figure who would say, '[America] is the country that welcomes everybody again.' [But] now we have to wait four more years, hopefully for somebody to give us back the country we knew and liked.''Yes, yes, there are legitimate counters to all these points. But before anyone here will listen to Mr. Bush make those counterpoints, he will have to really listen to them first.Op-Ed ColumnistOne of the most striking things I've found in Europe these past two weeks is the absolute conviction that the Bush team is just itching to invade Iran to prevent it from developing nuclear weapons. Psssssssst. Come over here. A little closer. Now listen: Don't tell the Iranians this, but the Bush team isn't going to be invading anybody. We don't have enough troops to finish the job in Iraq. Our military budget is completely maxed out. We couldn't invade Grenada today. If Iran is to forgo developing nuclear weapons, it will only be because the Europeans' diplomatic approach manages to persuade Tehran to do so.For two years the Europeans have been telling the Bush administration that its use of force to prevent states from developing nuclear weapons has been a failure in Iraq and that the Europeans have a better way -- multilateral diplomacy using carrots and sticks. Well, Europe, as we say in American baseball, ''You're up.''''I think this is an absolute test case for Europe's ability to lay out its own idea for a joint agenda with the United States to deal with a problem like Iran,'' said the Oxford historian Timothy Garton Ash, author of ''Free World: America, Europe and the Surprising Future of the West.'' ''O.K., we think bombing Iran is a bad idea. What is a good idea?'' For the Europeans to be successful, though, Mr. Ash said, they can't just be offering carrots. They have to credibly convey to Iran that they will wield their own stick. They have to credibly convey that they will refer Iran to the U.N. Security Council for real sanctions, if it is unwilling to strike a deal involving nuclear inspections in return for normalized economic relations with the West.''Very often there is the notion that Europe is the soft cop and the U.S. is the hard cop,'' Mr. Ash said. ''Here it must be the other way around. Europe has to talk as credibly about using economic sanctions as some in Washington have talked about using military force.''The U.S. has to help. The carrot the Iranians want for abandoning their nuclear program is not just unfettered trade with the West, but some kind of assurances that if they give up their nuclear research programs, the U.S. will agree to some kind of nonaggression accord. The Bush team has been reluctant to do this, because it wants regime change in Iran. (This is a mistake; we need to concentrate for now on changing the behavior of the Iranian regime and strengthening the reformers, and letting them handle the regime change.)If multilateral diplomacy is to work to defuse the brewing Iran nuclear crisis, ''the Europeans have to offer a more credible stick and the Americans need to offer a more credible carrot,'' Mr. Ash said. But the Europeans are not good at credibly threatening force.That's why this is a serious moment. If Britain, France and Germany, which are spearheading Europe's negotiations with Iran, fail, and if the U.S. use of force in Iraq (even if it succeeds) proves way too messy, expensive and dangerous to be repeated anytime soon, where are we? Is there any other way the West can promote real reform in the Arab-Muslim world?Yes, there is an alternative to the Euro-wimps and the neocons, and it is the ''geo-greens.'' I am a geo-green. The geo-greens believe that, going forward, if we put all our focus on reducing the price of oil -- by conservation, by developing renewable and alternative energies and by expanding nuclear power -- we will force more reform than by any other strategy. You give me $18-a-barrel oil and I will give you political and economic reform from Algeria to Iran. All these regimes have huge population bubbles and too few jobs. They make up the gap with oil revenues. Shrink the oil revenue and they will have to open up their economies and their schools and liberate their women so that their people can compete. It is that simple.By refusing to rein in U.S. energy consumption, the Bush team is not only depriving itself of the most effective lever for promoting internally driven reform in the Middle East, it is also depriving itself of any military option. As Richard Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, points out, given today's tight oil market and current U.S. consumption patterns, any kind of U.S. strike on Iran, one of the world's major oil producers, would send the price of oil through the roof, causing real problems for our economy. ''Our own energy policy has tied our hands,'' Mr. Haass said.The Bush team's laudable desire to promote sustained reform in the Middle East will never succeed unless it moves from neocon to geo-green.Op-Ed ColumnistThe last couple of years have not been easy for anyone, myself included, who hoped that the Iraq war would produce a decent, democratizing outcome. And even in the wake of the remarkable Iraqi election, the toppling of the Lebanese cabinet and the reforms brewing in Egypt, it is too soon for anyone to declare victory. We're dealing with some very unstable chemicals. But what makes me more hopeful today is precisely what made me hopeful that the Iraq war might work out, and that is the number of Arab-Muslim youth I've encountered since 9/11 who have urged me to keep writing about the need for democracy and reform in their part of the world.Of course, many Americans are surprised by this. America has treated the Arab-Muslim states for 50 years as a collection of gas stations. All we cared about was that their pumps were open and their prices low, and that they be nice to the Israelis. As long as the regimes did that, we said, they could do whatever they wanted ''out back.'' They could treat their women however they wanted, they could write about America in their newspapers however they wanted, and they could preach intolerance of other religions all they wanted -- just keep their pumps open and prices low and be nice to the Israelis. On 9/11, we got hit with everything that was going on ''out back.''Since then, it's been clear to me that unless we partner with Arabs and Muslims to change their context, unless we help them create the free space for a war of ideas that will allow for a new discussion out front and out back, we're just begging for another 9/11. I always knew we had partners there, but the democratic movements that have now emerged have shown me just how many young people there want to give voice to their aspirations and achieve their full potential -- something their governments and spiritual leaders have been blocking.If you want to get a taste of what they sound like, read Irshad Manji's courageous book ''The Trouble With Islam Today,'' and the letters and debates from young Muslims on her Web site (www.muslim-refusenik.com). Ms. Manji is a 36-year-old Canadian Muslim feminist who has dared to write a book calling for a reformation of Islam.''There's no bigger idea for the Muslim world today -- and consequently for all of us -- than reopening the gates of independent thinking, or 'ijtihad,''' she said. ''That's the main point of my book -- to show that Islam once had a pluralistic tradition of critical debate and dissent, and that we Muslims need to rediscover this tradition to update Islam for the 21st century. That's not being radical. That's being faithful.''Born in Uganda of an Indian-Muslim father and a mother with Egyptian roots who emigrated to Canada, Ms. Manji is a frequent lecturer about diversity on college campuses. ''Even before 9/11 and my book, I noticed that after my lectures young Muslims would gather at the side of the stage, wait for everyone else to leave and then walk over and say things like, 'Irshad, we need more voices to help open up this religion of ours, because if it doesn't open up we are leaving it.' That is what the clerics don't get. We're saving Islam by showing the emerging generation how they can be part of a pluralistic world and be faithful Muslims.''To that end, Ms. Manji has just launched what she calls Project Ijtihad. ''The goal,'' she explained, ''is to create a leadership center that will attract young, reform-minded Muslims to network with one another so they see that they're not alone, to develop the confidence to openly dissent with conformity in Islam and to learn about the golden age of Islam, when Muslims, Jews, Christians worked together to preserve and expand knowledge -- something we're rarely, if ever, taught in our public schools or in our Islamic religious schools.''At the urging of students, Ms. Manji recently had her book translated into Arabic and Urdu and posted on her Web site. Young Arabs and Pakistanis are now downloading it in private and discussing it. This week she was approached by a small Arabic publisher who operates in Lebanon and Germany -- and has just opened in Baghdad -- offering to publish her book in Iraq!''I can't help but appreciate the symbolism,'' she said. ''Baghdad was the seat of the Islamic enlightenment from the eighth to 12th centuries. It was a crossroads of goods, services, big ideas.''This will take time to play out, and a decent outcome is not assured. But the good news is that young Arabs and Muslims are starting to have a very different conversation ''out back,'' and more and more of them are demanding to have it out front.Op-Ed ColumnistFor the life of me, I simply do not understand why President Bush is objecting to the European Union's selling arms to China, ending a 16-year embargo. I mean, what's the problem?There is an obvious compromise that Mr. Bush could put on the table that would defuse this whole issue. Mr. Bush should simply say to France, Germany and their E.U. partners that America has absolutely no objection to Europeans' selling arms to China -- on one condition: that they sell arms to themselves first. That's right, the U.S. should support the export to China of any defense system that the Europeans buy for their own armies first. Buy one, sell one.But what the U.S. should not countenance is that at a time when the Europeans are spending peanuts on their own defense, making themselves into paper tigers and free riders on America for global policing, that they start exporting arms to a growing tiger -- China.This is especially true since the real reason that the E.U. wants to end its arms embargo with China is to position itself better to sell more Airbus passenger jets to Beijing. Weapons systems are the loss leader that the E.U. is dangling in front of the Chinese to persuade them to buy more of Europe's civilian airplanes. Indeed, what is really sad about the European arms sale proposal to China is that the E.U. doesn't seem to be demanding any political price, even the slightest change in behavior, from Beijing in return, except some vague ''code of conduct.'' Sure. Ask the software industry about Chinese promises not to pirate technology.I am not part of the bash-China lobby. I believe that the U.S. needs to engage China, not isolate it, and work with it so that it takes its rightful place on the world stage. I believe China is largely a force for stability in Asia, not instability. But one reason for that is that the U.S. has countered any other impulses from Beijing by maintaining a stable balance of power among China, Korea, Japan and Taiwan -- a balance that has helped the entire region prosper. The sale of advanced European weapons to China can only weaken that balance.But what really concerns me is Europe. Europe's armies were designed for static defense against the Soviet Union. But the primary security challenges to Europe today come from the Middle East, Central Asia and Africa. If you put all the E.U. armies together, they total around two million soldiers in uniform -- almost the same size as the U.S. armed forces. But there is one huge difference -- only about 5 percent of the European troops have the training, weaponry, logistical and intelligence support and airlift capability to fight a modern, hot war outside of Europe. (In the U.S. it is 70 percent in crucial units.)The rest of the European troops -- some of whom are unionized! -- do not have the training or tools to fight alongside America in a hot war. They might be good for peacekeeping, but not for winning a war against a conventional foe. God save the Europeans if they ever felt the need to confront a nuclear-armed Iran. U.S. defense spending will be over $400 billion in 2005. I wish it could be less, but one reason it can't is that the United States of Europe is spending less than half of what we are. And the U.S. and E.U. really are the pillars of global stability.The U.S. is building 180 C-17 long-range lift aircraft to transport troops and tanks anywhere in the world, and 112 C-5's, to replace the aging C-141's. The European NATO members have exactly four C-17's. They all belong to Britain and even those are leased from Boeing. The Europeans are so short of long-range lift aircraft that they basically have to depend on leased Russian and Ukrainian Antonov transports to get to the battlefield. George Robertson, the former NATO secretary general, used to ask them what they would do if a war broke out during the Christmas season, when most of the Antonovs are leased to toy companies shipping electronic games around the world. Ride, mister?For all of Europe's complaining about what the Bush team stands for, my ears are still ringing with the remark that a German columnist recently made to me in Berlin: ''What do we stand for?'' he asked. What is Europe's foreign policy? America is saying that the largest strategic issue of our time is peacefully managing the rise of China. We have to get this right. Having a strong Europe on our side -- not on both sides -- would be a big help.If Europe wants to go pacifist, that's fine. But there is nothing worse than a pacifist that sells arms -- especially in a way that increases the burden on its U.S. ally and protector.Op-Ed ColumnistThe massive pro-Syrian demonstration that the Hezbollah militia mounted on the streets of Beirut on Tuesday underscored just how much all the old slogans and sentiments -- anti-Israeli, anti-American, pro-Islamist, sectarian -- can be exploited by Syria, Iran and their local proxies to still mobilize popular forces against change. It is also another reminder that the Berlin Wall is falling in the Arab world, but Vaclav Havel, Lech Walesa and the Solidarity trade movement are not on the other side, just waiting to jump into the arms of the West. It is a much more divided, complex, confused and, at times, angry group.Consider the message that the leaders of Iran, Syria and Hezbollah were sending to President Bush through their mass rally in Beirut: ''Hey, Bush, you want a piece of us? Well, come and get it. Remember what Stalin said about the pope: how many divisions does he have? When it comes to divisions on the ground, pal, we've got 'em. You don't. So nobody is going to remake Lebanon without our permission and without our interests being taken into account.''What is the right response to this? I would begin my answer with an assertion: What we have been seeing in the outbursts of democracy in the streets of Beirut, Baghdad, Cairo and even Riyadh is something real and authentic. It is driven both in response to particular events -- like the murder of the former Lebanese prime minister Rafik Hariri -- and in response to a deep longing in this part of the world for a different future, particularly among young people, who know what is going on elsewhere and want their own piece of the freedom pie.''It was our Boston Tea Party,'' said the Lebanese political analyst Nawaf Salam, speaking of the recent spontaneous pro-democracy demonstrations in Lebanon, which Hezbollah tried to counter on Tuesday with its own pro-Syrian rally. ''People feel empowered for the first time; they are feeling that their voice matters -- that they can say things,'' added Mr. Salam, whose recent book, ''Options for Lebanon,'' is the best road map you will find for thinking through how democracy may emerge there. ''It is not yet victory, but for the first time in a very long time, people are feeling, 'I can make change.' And there is a real sense of fraternity and unity.''The spreading virus that ''things can change and I can make a difference'' is the most important thing happening in the Arab world today. It is symbolized by the Egyptian opposition's motto: ''Enough.'' And everyone is watching everyone else now -- and comparing. An Egyptian businesswoman remarked to me, with a real sense of envy, how free and alive and energetic the Lebanese opposition protesters seemed, compared with those in Egypt.The fact that Hezbollah had to resort to a mass rally, just like the Lebanese democracy movement's, is itself a victory for the democrats. Hezbollah clearly felt that it must prove it is as popular a force as the democratic opposition. But something tells me that those Hezbollah demonstrators who were waving the picture of Syria's president, Bashar al-Assad, were uncomfortable. And this is Hezbollah's weak spot: deep down, it and its supporters know that when they raise the pictures of Syria's president, they are raising the question of whose interests they have at heart.If democracy in Lebanon is going to re-emerge in a reasonably stable way, Lebanese democratic forces have to constantly be inviting Hezbollah to join them. After all, Hezbollah represents an important and powerful trend among Lebanon's Shiites, most of whom are patriots eager to see Lebanon independent and united. At the same time, though, the Lebanese democrats need to constantly and loudly ask Hezbollah -- and get the U.N. and the European Union to constantly and loudly ask Hezbollah -- ''Why are you waving the picture of the Syrian president? Whose side are you on?''President Bush should stay in the background and keep focused on defusing the Arab-Israeli conflict, which will deprive Hezbollah of all its excuses to remain armed. The impact on Hezbollah will be much more powerful if it's the Lebanese democrats and the Saudis and the Europeans who ask Hezbollah over and over, ''Do you have a real vision for a modern, progressive and pluralistic Lebanon? If so, why are you waving the picture of the Syrian president?''If Hezbollah puts down Assad's picture and comes up with an answer to that question, that would be a big deal. If not, it could spell big trouble, which is why Joseph Samaha wrote in Wednesday's Lebanese daily Al Safir, ''Yesterday was the sort of day in which homelands are founded or destroyed.''Op-Ed ColumnistFrom Baghdad to Beirut, the Middle East has seen a series of unprecedented popular demonstrations for democracy. There were, however, two street protests in December that got virtually no coverage, but were just as important, if not more. One took place in the Egyptian Nile Delta town of Mahalla and the other in the Suez Canal city of Ismailiya. Both of these raucous Egyptian demonstrations, which involved marches, strikes, denunciations of the government and appeals to Parliament, were triggered by President Hosni Mubarak's decision to sign the first substantial trade agreement with Israel since Camp David. That decision brought Egyptian workers from both areas into the streets. They were furious. They were enraged. Why?They were not included in the new trade deal with Israel.Now, that's a new Middle East. On Dec. 14, Egypt, Israel and the U.S. signed an accord setting up three Qualified Industrial Zones (Q.I.Z.'s) in Egypt. The deal stipulated the following: Any Egyptian company operating in one of these Q.I.Z.'s that imports from an Israeli company at least 11.7 percent of the parts, materials or services that go into the Egyptian company's final product can then export that finished product to the U.S. duty free. This is a big deal for Egypt, which, unlike Jordan and Israel, does not have a free-trade treaty with the U.S. As part of the accord, the U.S. named Greater Cairo, Alexandria and Port Said the three Q.I.Z.'s. It had to be limited to only three municipalities so that the U.S. would not be swamped with Egyptian exports -- hence the protests from the two big Egyptian manufacturing centers that were left out.According to Rashid Mohamed Rashid, Egypt's impressive new minister of foreign trade, 397 Egyptian companies have already signed up to participate in the Q.I.Z. program, most of them small and medium-size firms. Many of these Egyptian companies have already gone to Israel to forge deals with Israeli suppliers or started work with Israeli partners to identify export markets in the U.S. Some Israeli companies are setting up shop in the Egyptian Q.I.Z.'s to provide services right on the spot.There are a lot of messages in this bottle. One is that if you create a real opportunity for Israeli and Egyptian businesses to interact profitably, not only will Egyptians ignore the protests of the old Nasserites who want to boycott Israel, they will seize the opportunity and protest mightily if they are kept out.Another message: This ''Baghdad spring'' will not blossom into sustainable democracy in any of these Arab states without a broader middle class and civil society institutions to support it. For too long, U.S. foreign policy was based on buying stability in the Arab world by supporting dictators, who destroyed all the independent press, political parties, unions, real private sector and civil society in their countries -- everything except the mosque. Iraq is the starkest example of this, which is why democratization there will take time.Looking at Eastern Europe on the eve of the fall of the Berlin Wall, said Emanuele Ottolenghi, a lecturer on the Middle East at Oxford, ''we could have predicted which countries would have an easy transition to democracy and which ones not.'' Countries like Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and the Baltic states, which had a history of liberal institutions and free markets that had been suppressed by communism, quickly flourished. Others farther east, which did not have such institutions in their past and were starting from scratch -- Bulgaria, Romania and the former Soviet republics -- have struggled since the fall of the wall.The same will be true in the Middle East, where democracy will not just spring up because autocrats fall down. It will arise only if these countries develop, among other things, export-oriented private sectors, which can be the foundation for a vibrant middle class that is not dependent upon the state for contracts and has a vital interest in an open economy, a free press and its own political parties. The development of such a private sector was crucial in democratizing Taiwan and South Korea.That is why, beyond Iraq, America's priorities should be to sign a free-trade agreement with Egypt -- which would help foster an export-oriented private sector there just when President Mubarak has signaled an end to 50 years of military rule -- and get Syria out of Lebanon, which would free the dynamic private sector that already exists there, but has been stifled by Syria. Free Lebanon and free Egypt's economy and they will change the rest of the Middle East for us -- for free.Op-Ed ColumnistBush officials have always been eager to pose as the tough guys willing to make the tough decisions. On Iraq and Afghanistan, they did. But when it comes to China, the Bush administration is engaged in one of the greatest acts of unilateral disarmament ever seen in U.S. foreign policy.National security is about so much more than just military deployments. It is also about our tax, energy and competitiveness policies. And if you look at all these areas, the Bush team has not only been steadily eroding America's leverage and room for maneuver vis-à-vis its biggest long-term competitor -- China -- but it has actually been making us more dependent than ever on Beijing. Indeed, if the Bush policies were wrapped into a single legislative bill it could be called ''The U.S.-China Dependency Act.''The excessive tax cuts for the rich, combined with a total lack of discipline on spending by the Bush team and its Republican-run Congress, have helped China become the second-largest holder of U.S. debt, with a little under $200 billion worth. No, I don't think China will start dumping its T-bills on a whim. But don't tell me that as China buys up more and more of our debt -- and that is the only way we can finance the tax holiday the Bush team wants to make permanent -- it won't limit our room to maneuver with Beijing, should it take aggressive steps toward Taiwan.What China might do with all its U.S. T-bills in the event of a clash over Taiwan is a total wild card that we have put in Beijing's hands.On energy, the Bush team's obsession with drilling in the Alaskan wilderness to increase supply is mind-boggling. ''I am sure China will be thrilled with the Bush decision to drill in Alaska,'' said the noted energy economist Philip Verleger Jr. ''Oil in Alaska cannot easily or efficiently be shipped to our Gulf Coast refineries. The logical markets are on the West Coast of the United States and in Asia. Consumers in China and Japan, not the U.S., will be the real beneficiaries of any big Alaska find.''With a big find, China and Japan will be able to increase imports from a dependable supplier -- the U.S. -- while consumers in the U.S. will still be at the mercy of unreliable suppliers, such as Venezuela and Saudi Arabia. It is simple geography. [Also], a big find will lead to lower prices in the short term, promoting more emissions and more warming.''Moreover, focusing exclusively on squeezing out a little more supply will only discourage conservation, Mr. Verleger added, setting the stage for higher prices again in three or four years -- ''when exhausting oil reserves and burgeoning demand from China and India will drive the price of oil to well above $100 a barrel.'' That will put even more money in the pockets of some of the world's worst governments.That's why America urgently needs what I call a ''geo-green'' strategy, which combines geopolitics with environmentalism. Geo-greenism starts with a $1-per-gallon gasoline tax, which would help close our budget gap and force the U.S. auto industry to convert more of its fleet to hybrid and ethanol technology, thereby reducing the amount of money going to Sudan, Saudi Arabia and Iran for oil. It would also reduce our dependence on China to finance our debt and the chances that we will end up in a global struggle with China for energy.Finally, on competition policy, the Bush team and Congress cut the budget of the National Science Foundation for this fiscal year by $105 million. I could not put it better than Congressman Vern Ehlers, one of the few dissenting Republicans, who said: ''This decision shows dangerous disregard for our nation's future at a time when other nations continue to surpass our students in math and science and consistently increase their funding of basic research. We cannot hope to fight jobs lost to international competition without a well-trained and educated work force.''In addition, at a time when China is encouraging its new companies to offer employees stock options to get Chinese innovators to stay at home and start new firms, the Bush team has been mutely going along with a change in accounting standards that will force U.S. companies to expense stock options by June 2005. This is likely to dampen the growth of our own high-tech companies and encourage U.S.-educated Indian and Chinese techies to go back home.I am not a China basher. We need to engage China, and help accommodate its rising power with the world system, but the only way to do that is from a position of strength. But everything the Bush team is doing is ensuring that it will be from a position of weakness.Op-Ed ColumnistBush officials have always been eager to pose as the tough guys willing to make the tough decisions. On Iraq and Afghanistan, they did. But when it comes to China, the Bush administration is engaged in one of the greatest acts of unilateral disarmament ever seen in U.S. foreign policy.National security is about so much more than just military deployments. It is also about our tax, energy and competitiveness policies. And if you look at all these areas, the Bush team has not only been steadily eroding America's leverage and room for maneuver vis-à-vis its biggest long-term competitor -- China -- but it has actually been making us more dependent than ever on Beijing. Indeed, if the Bush policies were wrapped into a single legislative bill it could be called ''The U.S.-China Dependency Act.''The excessive tax cuts for the rich, combined with a total lack of discipline on spending by the Bush team and its Republican-run Congress, have helped China become the second-largest holder of U.S. debt, with a little under $200 billion worth. No, I don't think China will start dumping its T-bills on a whim. But don't tell me that as China buys up more and more of our debt -- and that is the only way we can finance the tax holiday the Bush team wants to make permanent -- it won't limit our room to maneuver with Beijing, should it take aggressive steps toward Taiwan.What China might do with all its U.S. T-bills in the event of a clash over Taiwan is a total wild card that we have put in Beijing's hands.On energy, the Bush team's obsession with drilling in the Alaskan wilderness to increase supply is mind-boggling. ''I am sure China will be thrilled with the Bush decision to drill in Alaska,'' said the noted energy economist Philip Verleger Jr. ''Oil in Alaska cannot easily or efficiently be shipped to our Gulf Coast refineries. The logical markets are on the West Coast of the United States and in Asia. Consumers in China and Japan, not the U.S., will be the real beneficiaries of any big Alaska find.''With a big find, China and Japan will be able to increase imports from a dependable supplier -- the U.S. -- while consumers in the U.S. will still be at the mercy of unreliable suppliers, such as Venezuela and Saudi Arabia. It is simple geography. [Also], a big find will lead to lower prices in the short term, promoting more emissions and more warming.''Moreover, focusing exclusively on squeezing out a little more supply will only discourage conservation, Mr. Verleger added, setting the stage for higher prices again in three or four years -- ''when exhausting oil reserves and burgeoning demand from China and India will drive the price of oil to well above $100 a barrel.'' That will put even more money in the pockets of some of the world's worst governments.That's why America urgently needs what I call a ''geo-green'' strategy, which combines geopolitics with environmentalism. Geo-greenism starts with a $1-per-gallon gasoline tax, which would help close our budget gap and force the U.S. auto industry to convert more of its fleet to hybrid and ethanol technology, thereby reducing the amount of money going to Sudan, Saudi Arabia and Iran for oil. It would also reduce our dependence on China to finance our debt and the chances that we will end up in a global struggle with China for energy.Finally, on competition policy, the Bush team and Congress cut the budget of the National Science Foundation for this fiscal year by $105 million. I could not put it better than Congressman Vern Ehlers, one of the few dissenting Republicans, who said: ''This decision shows dangerous disregard for our nation's future at a time when other nations continue to surpass our students in math and science and consistently increase their funding of basic research. We cannot hope to fight jobs lost to international competition without a well-trained and educated work force.''In addition, at a time when China is encouraging its new companies to offer employees stock options to get Chinese innovators to stay at home and start new firms, the Bush team has been mutely going along with a change in accounting standards that will force U.S. companies to expense stock options by June 2005. This is likely to dampen the growth of our own high-tech companies and encourage U.S.-educated Indian and Chinese techies to go back home.I am not a China basher. We need to engage China, and help accommodate its rising power with the world system, but the only way to do that is from a position of strength. But everything the Bush team is doing is ensuring that it will be from a position of weakness.As we approach the season of the Nobel Peace Prize, I would like to nominate the spiritual leader of Iraq's Shiites, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, for this year's medal. I'm serious.If there is a decent outcome in Iraq, President Bush will deserve, and receive, real credit for creating the conditions for democratization there, by daring to topple Saddam Hussein. But we tend to talk about Iraq as if it is all about us and what we do. If some kind of democracy takes root there, it will also be due in large measure to the instincts and directives of the dominant Iraqi Shiite communal leader, Ayatollah Sistani. It was Mr. Sistani who insisted that there had to be a direct national election in Iraq, rejecting the original goofy U.S. proposal for regional caucuses. It was Mr. Sistani who insisted that the elections not be postponed in the face of the Baathist-fascist insurgency. And it was Mr. Sistani who ordered Shiites not to retaliate for the Sunni Baathist and jihadist attempts to drag them into a civil war by attacking Shiite mosques and massacring Shiite civilians.In many ways, Mr. Sistani has played the role for President George W. Bush that Nelson Mandela and Mikhail Gorbachev played for his father, President George H.W. Bush. It was Mr. Mandela's instincts and leadership -- in keeping the transition to black rule in South Africa nonviolent -- that helped the Bush I administration and its allies bring that process in for a soft landing. And it was Mr. Gorbachev's insistence that the dismantling of the Soviet Empire, and particularly East Germany, be nonviolent that brought the Soviet Union in for a soft landing. In international relations, as in sports, it is often better to be lucky than good. And having the luck to have history deal you a Mandela, a Gorbachev or a Sistani as your partner at a key historical juncture -- as opposed to a Yasir Arafat or a Robert Mugabe -- can make all the difference between U.S. policy looking brilliant and U.S. policy looking futile.Mr. Sistani has also contributed three critical elements to the democracy movement in the wider Arab world. First, he built his legitimacy around not just his religious-scholarly credentials but around a politics focused on developing Iraq for Iraqis. To put it another way, says the Middle East expert Stephen P. Cohen, ''Sistani did not build his politics on negating someone else.'' Saddam Hussein built his politics around negating America, Iran and Israel. Arafat built his whole life around negating Zionism -- rarely, if ever, speaking about Palestinian economic development or education. The politics of negation has a deep and rich history in the Middle East, because so many leaders there are illegitimate and need to negate someone to justify their rule. What Mr. Sistani, the late Lebanese Sunni leader Rafik Hariri and the new Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas all have in common is that they rose to power by focusing on a positive agenda for their own people, not negating another.The second thing that Mr. Sistani did was put the people and their aspirations at the center of Iraqi politics, not some narrow elite or self-appointed clergy (see: Iran), which is what the Iraqi election was all about. In doing so he has helped to legitimize ''people power'' in a region where it was unheard of. In Lebanon, Egypt and Palestine -- where Hamas recently said it would take part in parliamentary elections -- the ballot box and popular support, not just the gun, are showing signs of becoming real sources of legitimacy. Both Hezbollah and Hamas will have to prove -- with turnout, not terrorism -- that they are entitled to a larger slice of power.Third, and maybe most important, Mr. Sistani brings to Arab politics a legitimate, pragmatic interpretation of Islam, one that says Islam should inform politics and the constitution, but clerics should not rule.The process of democratizing the Arab world is going to be long and bumpy. But the chances for success are immeasurably improved when we have partners from within the region who are legitimate, but have progressive instincts. That is Mr. Sistani. Lady Luck has shined on us by keeping alive this 75-year-old ayatollah, who resides in a small house in a narrow alley in Najaf and almost never goes out the door. How someone with his instincts and wisdom could have emerged from the train wreck that was Saddam Hussein's Iraq, I will never know. All I have to say is: May he live to be 120 -- and give that man a Nobel Prize.Op-Ed ColumnistOf all the stories about the abuse of prisoners of war by American soldiers and C.I.A. agents, surely none was more troubling and important than the March 16 report by my Times colleagues Douglas Jehl and Eric Schmitt that at least 26 prisoners have died in U.S. custody in Iraq and Afghanistan since 2002 -- in what Army and Navy investigators have concluded or suspect were acts of criminal homicide.You have to stop and think about this: We killed 26 of our prisoners of war. In 18 cases, people have been recommended for prosecution or action by their supervising agencies, and eight other cases are still under investigation. That is simply appalling. Only one of the deaths occurred at the Abu Ghraib prison in Iraq, reported Jehl and Schmitt -- ''showing how broadly the most violent abuses extended beyond those prison walls and contradicting early impressions that the wrongdoing was confined to a handful of members of the military police on the prison's night shift.''Yes, I know war is hell and ugliness abounds in every corner. I also understand that in places like Iraq and Afghanistan, we are up against a vicious enemy, which, if it had the power, would do great harm to our country. You do not deal with such people with kid gloves. But killing prisoners of war, presumably in the act of torture, is an inexcusable outrage. The fact that Congress has just shrugged this off, and no senior official or officer has been fired, is a travesty. This administration is for ''ownership'' of everything except responsibility.President Bush just appointed Karen Hughes, his former media adviser, to head up yet another U.S. campaign to improve America's image in the Arab world. I have a suggestion: Just find out who were the cabinet, C.I.A. and military officers on whose watch these 26 homicides occurred and fire them. That will do more to improve America's image in the Arab-Muslim world than any ad campaign, which will be useless if this sort of prisoner abuse is shrugged off. Republicans in Congress went into overdrive to protect the sanctity of Terri Schiavo's life. But they were mute when it came to the sanctity of life for prisoners in our custody. Such hypocrisy is not going to win any P.R. battles.By coincidence, while following this prisoner abuse story, I've been reading ''Washington's Crossing,'' the outstanding book by the Brandeis historian David Hackett Fischer about how George Washington and his troops rescued the American Revolution after British forces and German Hessian mercenaries had routed them in the early battles around New Jersey.What is particularly moving is one of Mr. Fischer's concluding sections, ''An American Way of War,'' in which he contrasts how Washington dealt with prisoners of war with how the British and Hessian forces did: ''According to the 'the laws' of European war, quarter was the privilege of being allowed to surrender and to become a prisoner. By custom and tradition, soldiers in Europe believed that they had a right to extend quarter or deny it. In these 'laws of war,' no captive had an inalienable right to be taken prisoner, or even to life itself.''American attitudes were very different. ''With some exceptions, American leaders believed that quarter should be extended to all combatants as a matter of right. Americans were outraged when quarter was denied to their soldiers.'' In one egregious incident, at the battle at Drake's Farm, British troops murdered all seven of Washington's soldiers who had surrendered, crushing their brains with muskets.''The Americans recovered the mutilated corpses and were shocked,'' wrote Mr. Fischer. The British commander simply denied responsibility. ''The words of the British commander, as much as the acts of his men,'' wrote Mr. Fischer, ''reinforced the American resolve to run their own war in a different spirit. Washington ordered that Hessian captives would be treated as human beings with the same rights of humanity for which Americans were striving. The Hessians were amazed to be treated with decency and even kindness. At first they could not understand it.'' The same policy was extended to British prisoners.In concluding his book, Mr. Fischer wrote lines that President Bush would do well to ponder: George Washington and the American soldiers and civilians fighting alongside him in the New Jersey campaign not only reversed the momentum of a bitter war, but they did so by choosing ''a policy of humanity that aligned the conduct of the war with the values of the Revolution. They set a high example, and we have much to learn from them.''Op-Ed ColumnistHow will future historians explain it? How will they possibly explain why President George W. Bush decided to ignore the energy crisis staring us in the face and chose instead to spend all his electoral capital on a futile effort to undo the New Deal, by partially privatizing Social Security? We are, quite simply, witnessing one of the greatest examples of misplaced priorities in the history of the U.S. presidency.''Ah, Friedman, but you overstate the case.'' No, I understate it. Look at the opportunities our country is missing -- and the risks we are assuming -- by having a president and vice president who refuse to lift a finger to put together a ''geo-green'' strategy that would marry geopolitics, energy policy and environmentalism.By doing nothing to lower U.S. oil consumption, we are financing both sides in the war on terrorism and strengthening the worst governments in the world. That is, we are financing the U.S. military with our tax dollars and we are financing the jihadists -- and the Saudi, Sudanese and Iranian mosques and charities that support them -- through our gasoline purchases. The oil boom is also entrenching the autocrats in Russia and Venezuela, which is becoming Castro's Cuba with oil. By doing nothing to reduce U.S. oil consumption we are also setting up a global competition with China for energy resources, including right on our doorstep in Canada and Venezuela. Don't kid yourself: China's foreign policy today is very simple -- holding on to Taiwan and looking for oil.Finally, by doing nothing to reduce U.S. oil consumption we are only hastening the climate change crisis, and the Bush officials who scoff at the science around this should hang their heads in shame. And it is only going to get worse the longer we do nothing. Wired magazine did an excellent piece in its April issue about hybrid cars, which get 40 to 50 miles to the gallon with very low emissions. One paragraph jumped out at me: ''Right now, there are about 800 million cars in active use. By 2050, as cars become ubiquitous in China and India, it'll be 3.25 billion. That increase represents an almost unimaginable threat to our environment. Quadruple the cars means quadruple the carbon dioxide emissions -- unless cleaner, less gas-hungry vehicles become the norm.''All the elements of what I like to call a geo-green strategy are known:We need a gasoline tax that would keep pump prices fixed at $4 a gallon, even if crude oil prices go down. At $4 a gallon (premium gasoline averages about $6 a gallon in Europe), we could change the car-buying habits of a large segment of the U.S. public, which would make it profitable for the car companies to convert more of their fleets to hybrid or ethanol engines, which over time could sharply reduce our oil consumption.We need to start building nuclear power plants again. The new nuclear technology is safer and cleaner than ever. ''The risks of climate change by continuing to rely on hydrocarbons are much greater than the risks of nuclear power,'' said Peter Schwartz, chairman of Global Business Network, a leading energy and strategy consulting firm. ''Climate change is real and it poses a civilizational threat that [could] transform the carrying capacity of the entire planet.''And we need some kind of carbon tax that would move more industries from coal to wind, hydro and solar power, or other, cleaner fuels. The revenue from these taxes would go to pay down the deficit and the reduction in oil imports would help to strengthen the dollar and defuse competition for energy with China.It's smart geopolitics. It's smart fiscal policy. It is smart climate policy. Most of all -- it's smart politics! Even evangelicals are speaking out about our need to protect God's green earth. ''The Republican Party is much greener than George Bush or Dick Cheney,'' remarked Mr. Schwartz. ''There is now a near convergence of support on the environmental issue. Look at how popular [Arnold] Schwarzenegger, a green Republican, is becoming because of what he has done on the environment in California.''Imagine if George Bush declared that he was getting rid of his limousine for an armor-plated Ford Escape hybrid, adopting a geo-green strategy and building an alliance of neocons, evangelicals and greens to sustain it. His popularity at home -- and abroad -- would soar. The country is dying to be led on this. Instead, he prefers to squander his personal energy trying to take apart the New Deal and throwing red meat to right-to-life fanatics. What a waste of a presidency. How will future historians explain it?Op-Ed ColumnistI've been to this play before. It always starts out like the coming-out season for debutantes in Palm Beach, and it always ends around a smoky poker table at Binions casino in Las Vegas.That is, every new secretary of state gets his or her moment on the world stage, where everyone ''oohs'' and ''ahs'' about how smart they are and what a ''dream team'' staff they have put together. As the first secretary of state to ever wear stiletto heels while reviewing troops, Condoleezza Rice has had a coming-out season second to none.The savvy secretaries don't take any of this seriously. They know that eventually every secretary gets dealt a poker hand -- and you never know when it'll come or what sort of cards it'll contain: the 1973 Middle East war (Henry Kissinger), the rise of Mikhail Gorbachev (George Shultz), the fall of the Berlin Wall (James Baker), Kosovo (Madeleine Albright), Iraq (Colin Powell). And this poker hand is seven-card stud, no-limit Texas Hold 'Em. How well you play this high-stakes hand usually determines your legacy as secretary of state.Secretary Rice may get dealt other big hands, but there is one already waiting for her on the table. It is the four fragile democratizations unfolding in the Middle East: Iraq, Lebanon, Egypt and Palestine-Israel. Whether any of these come to fruition will certainly form a crucial part of the Rice legacy.For the last month or so, the Bush team has been doing a victory lap, taking credit for the outbreak of democracy in the Arab world. While I disagree with many Bush policies, I think the president does deserve credit for unleashing something very important in the politically moribund Arab East. Many of the necessary elements for democratization are now in place in Iraq (free and fair elections), in Lebanon (a Syrian withdrawal from Beirut), in Egypt (President Mubarak's commitment to multicandidate presidential elections) and in Gaza (an Israeli commitment to withdraw and Palestinian elections).But while the necessary conditions may now be in place, the sufficient conditions for democratization are still not present in any of these arenas. The Iraqi election was Jan. 30 and the Kurds, Shiites and Sunnis have still not agreed on a government, and the insurgency is still going strong. In Lebanon, the Cedar Revolution is now bogged down in a standoff between pro-Syrian and anti-Syrian Lebanese. In Egypt, it's not clear whether the upcoming presidential elections will be free -- with anyone who wants to run able to -- or fair -- with international observers. And in Israel-Palestine, Ariel Sharon's new settlement binge near Jerusalem underscores how difficult it will be to maintain momentum there.The common theme in all four areas is that the key parties are doing the right things for the wrong reasons. Democratization is everyone's second choice. First, the Kurds and Shiites want to consolidate their own power inside Iraq; the Lebanese opposition wants to get rid of the Syrians; the Egyptians want to get U.S. pressure off their backs; and the Israelis want to get rid of Gaza's huge Palestinian population.In history, a lot of good has started with people doing the right thing for the wrong reasons. But you will only have self-sustaining democratization in the Middle East if people start to do the right thing for the right reasons -- if the different sects in Iraq and Lebanon really do hammer out a shared vision and set of rules for their two countries. If Egypt recognizes it can't thrive without liberalizing its economy and political institutions. If Israelis and Palestinians really do come to terms with each other's nationalism. Otherwise, you'll have constant backsliding.Trying to make any one of these democracy projects self-sustaining -- and that is the test -- would be a career. Secretary Rice's challenge is to do all four at once. The burden is not hers alone. The parties themselves must carry the lion's share. But her responsibility is undeniable. Does she have the toughness to deal with Ariel Sharon? She has not shown it up to now. If the Bush team lets Mr. Sharon trade Gaza for the West Bank, the whole U.S. democratization agenda in the region will be set back. Does she have the moxie to restrain the Kurds and Shiites from overreaching in Iraq? The steel to deal with the Syrians? The will to move the Egyptians? Too soon to say. But this is the early poker hand she has been dealt, and how she plays it will determine, in part, whether the Bush team has uncorked democratization in the Middle East (I hope so) or set loose a new deadlock. (I hope not.)Op-Ed ColumnistUntil the recent elections in Iraq and among the Palestinians, the modern Arab world was largely immune to the winds of democracy that have blown everywhere else in the world. Why? That's a pretty important question. For years, though, it was avoided in both the East and the West.In the West it was avoided because a toxic political correctness infected the academic field of Middle Eastern studies -- to such a degree that anyone focusing on the absence of freedom in the Arab world ran the risk of being labeled an ''Orientalist'' or an ''essentialist.'' It was also avoided because Western governments basically told Arab leaders that all they needed to do was keep their oil pumps open and their prices low and be nice to Israel. If they did all that, they could deny their own people the freedom America advocated everywhere else.Meanwhile, the Arab peoples were told by their own leaders and state-owned intellectuals that democracy had to come later -- after the nationalist struggle against colonialism or the liberation of Palestine or the creation of an Islamic state.Well, the combination of 9/11, the Bush policies and the flattening of the world, whereby everyone can increasingly see how everyone else is living, changed all that -- as evidenced this week with the publication of the third Arab Human Development Report, written by a courageous group of Arab social scientists under the auspices of the United Nations Development Program. This is one of the finest U.N. products under Kofi Annan.The first report, in 2002, was about the poor state of Arab human development. The second, in 2003, was about the poor state of Arab education and science. The new one focuses on ''the acute deficit of freedom and good governance'' in the Arab world. It underscores how much Arab peoples crave, and need, freedom and good government -- as much any other people. With the great news that Iraqis are finally forming a new government, it couldn't appear at a better time.The report notes that most Arab states today resemble ''a 'black hole,' which converts its surrounding social environment into a setting in which nothing moves and from which nothing escapes.'' All political parties, institutions, courts, intelligence services, police and media are centralized in the hands of the Arab leader -- that's why the ''modern-day Arab state is frequently dubbed 'the intelligence state.''' What all these states have in common, the report says, ''is that power is concentrated at the tip of the executive pyramid and that the margin of freedom permitted (which can be swiftly reduced) has no effect on the state's firm and absolute grip on power.'' But without a majority of people behind them, all of these Arab regimes lack legitimacy.Arab societal structures tend to reinforce these autocratic trends, the report says: ''The family, the primary unit of Arab society, is based on clannism, which implants submission, and is considered the enemy of personal independence, intellectual daring and the flowering of a unique and authentic human entity. Once children enter school, they find an educational institution, curricula, teaching and evaluation methods which tend to rely on dictation and instill submissiveness. This learning environment does not open the doors to freedom of thought and criticism.''The chain constricting freedom, the report notes, ''completes its circle in the political realm, squeezing Arab public life into a small and constricted space. This complicated process has led Arab citizens, including some among the intelligentsia, to a state of submission fed by fear and marked by denial of their subjugation.''The report's authors conclude with their hope for a broad, peaceful redistribution of power in the Arab world, their fear that nothing will change -- which they predict could lead to ''chaotic upheavals'' -- and their expectation of some externally induced change and muddling through.But the important thing about this report is that political reform is now being put on the Arab agenda by Arabs. Yes, it's scathing about the Western and Israeli roles in retarding Arab democratization, but it's equally scathing about what Arabs have done to themselves and how they must change -- people don't change when you tell them they should, but when they tell themselves they must. Read this report and you'll also understand why part of every Arab hates the U.S. invasion of Iraq -- and why another part is praying that it succeeds.Op-Ed Columnist Thomas L. Friedman's documentary ''Does Europe Hate Us?'' will be shown on the Discovery Channel tonight at 8 and on the Discovery Times Channel on Monday at 9 p.m.So here's a question that I've been wrestling with lately: With all these reports about the bungling of U.S. intelligence, and the C.I.A.'s relying on bogus informants with names like ''Curveball'' or ''Knucklehead'' or whatever, why have there been no terrorist attacks in the U.S. since 9/11? I've got my own pet theory about what's produced this period of calm -- and, more important, why it may be coming to an end.Let's start with the facts. Despite all the code reds and code oranges we've been subjected to by the Department of Homeland Security, and despite the mountain of newspaper articles about how underprotected our ports and borders are, the fact is that not only has there not been another 9/11, but there has not even been a serious failed attempt that we know of.I'm not complaining -- I'm just wondering why. It still seems to me ridiculously easy to blow up a car in the heart of Chicago. And anyone who has flown on a private jet since 9/11 can tell you that security at these private terminals is still so lax that if you showed up in a Saudi headdress with a West Virginia driver's license under the name of ''Billy Bob bin Laden'' and asked for flight directions for your chartered Learjet to Lower Manhattan, there's a good chance no one would stop you.So, how then do we explain the calm? To begin with, I'd give a tip o' the hat to the C.I.A., the F.B.I. and the Department of Homeland Security. I have no doubt that their increased vigilance -- and coordination with European and Arab intelligence services -- has made it much harder for terrorists to organize. Moreover, thanks to Gen. John Abizaid's Centcom forces in Afghanistan, Al Qaeda no longer has a whole country from which to plan, train and coordinate terrorist attacks with impunity. The fact that Al Qaeda effectively controlled a country is what made it unique. Also, new U.S. visa policies have made it much harder for bad guys to get into America.If your name is Muhammad and you are a 21-year-old single Arab man and you have not visited Disney World yet, well, you may want to consider Euro Disney, because your chances of getting a U.S. tourist visa are very low. Frankly, I wish this were not the case because we're keeping a lot of good, talented Arab men and women from getting educated in America, which is the best way of building friends. This is one of the sad byproducts of 9/11 -- but it has undoubtedly made it more difficult for the few bad apples to get in as well.Despite all of that, I fear that we may now be entering the most dangerous period since 9/11. Why? Because I've always believed that one of the most important reasons there has been no new terrorist attack in America has to do with the U.S. invasions of both Iraq and Afghanistan. It is not only that the Bush administration has taken the fight to the enemy, but that the enemy has welcomed that fight.To the extent that the Baathists and Jihadists have a coordinated strategy, their first priority, I think, is to defeat American forces in the heart of their world. Because if they can defeat America in the heart of the Arab-Muslim world, it will have so much more resonance than setting off a car bomb in Las Vegas -- especially now that 9/11 has set the terrorism bar so high in terms of effect.If the Jihadists can defeat us in the heart of their world, and force us from Iraq, it will have a huge impact on the Arab street and shake every pro-American Arab regime. The Jihadists have always understood that Iraq is the ballgame. Iraq is the big one. Winning there is what really advances their agendas.The reason things may be getting more dangerous now is that the formation of a freely elected government in Iraq may signal that the Baathist-Jihadist insurgency is being gradually defeated. The U.S. may even be able to withdraw some troops. And there is nothing worse for the Baathists and Jihadists than to be defeated in the heart of their world -- and, even more so, to be defeated in the heart of their world by other Arabs and Muslims who are repudiating the Jihadists' vision and tactics.I fear that when and if the Jihadists conclude that they have been defeated in the heart of their world, they will be sorely tempted to throw a Hail Mary pass. That is, they may want to launch a spectacular, headline-grabbing act of terrorism in America that tries to mask, and compensate for, just how defeated they have become at home.In short, the more the Jihadists lose in Iraq, the more likely they are to use their rump forces to try something really crazy in America to make up for it. So let's stay the course in Iraq, but stay extra-vigilant at home.Op-Ed ColumnistOne of the things that I can't figure out about the Bush team is why an administration that is so focused on projecting U.S. military strength abroad has taken such little interest in America's economic competitiveness at home -- the underlying engine of our strength. At a time when the global economic playing field is being flattened -- enabling young Indians and Chinese to collaborate and compete with Americans more than ever before -- this administration is off on an ideological jag. It is trying to take apart the New Deal by privatizing Social Security, when what we really need most today is a New New Deal to make more Americans employable in 21st-century jobs.We have a Treasury secretary from the railroad industry. We have an administration that won't lift a finger to prevent the expensing of stock options, which is going to inhibit the ability of U.S. high-tech firms to attract talent -- at a time when China encourages its start-ups to grant stock options to young innovators. And we have movie theaters in certain U.S. towns afraid to show science films because they are based on evolution and not creationism.The Bush team is proposing cutting the Pentagon's budget for basic science and technology research by 20 percent next year -- after President Bush and the Republican Congress already slashed the 2005 budget of the National Science Foundation by $100 million.When the National Innovation Initiative, a bipartisan study by the country's leading technologists and industrialists about how to re-energize U.S. competitiveness, was unveiled last December, it was virtually ignored by the White House. Did you hear about it? Probably not, because the president preferred to focus all attention on privatizing Social Security.It's as if we have an industrial-age presidency, catering to a pre-industrial ideological base, in a post-industrial era.Thomas Bleha, a former U.S. Foreign Service officer in Japan, has a fascinating piece in the May-June issue of Foreign Affairs that begins like this: ''In the first three years of the Bush administration, the United States dropped from 4th to 13th place in global rankings of broadband Internet usage. Today, most U.S. homes can access only 'basic' broadband, among the slowest, most expensive and least reliable in the developed world, and the United States has fallen even further behind in mobile-phone-based Internet access. The lag is arguably the result of the Bush administration's failure to make a priority of developing these networks. In fact, the United States is the only industrialized state without an explicit national policy for promoting broadband.''Since it took over in 2001, the Bush team has made it clear that its priorities are tax cuts, missile defense and the war on terrorism -- not keeping the U.S. at the forefront of Internet innovation. In the administration's first three years, President Bush barely uttered the word ''broadband,'' Mr. Bleha notes, but when America ''dropped the Internet leadership baton, Japan picked it up. In 2001, Japan was well behind the United States in the broadband race. But thanks to top-level political leadership and ambitious goals, it soon began to move ahead.''By May 2003, a higher percentage of homes in Japan than the United States had broadband.''Today, nearly all Japanese have access to 'high-speed' broadband, with an average connection time 16 times faster than in the United States -- for only about $22 a month. And that is to say nothing of Internet access through mobile phones, an area in which Japan is even further ahead of the United States. It is now clear that Japan and its neighbors will lead the charge in high-speed broadband over the next several years.''South Korea, which has the world's greatest percentage of broadband users, and urban China, which last year surpassed the U.S. in the number of broadband users, are keeping pace with Japan -- not us. By investing heavily in these new technologies, Mr. Bleha notes, these nations will be the first to reap their benefits -- from increased productivity to stronger platforms for technological innovation; new kinds of jobs, services and content; and rising standards of living.Economics is not like war. It can be win-win. But you need to be at a certain level to be able to claim your share of a global pie that is both expanding and becoming more complex. Tax cuts can't solve every problem. This administration -- which often seems more interested in indulging creationism than spurring creativity -- is doing a very poor job of preparing the country for that next level.Op-Ed ColumnistOn the surface, the dramas playing out among Israeli Jews -- over whether to withdraw from the Gaza Strip -- and among Iraqi, Lebanese and Palestinian Arabs -- over how to share power -- may seem totally disconnected. But in fact they are all variations on a theme: can democracy really take root or thrive in the Middle East?Lord knows, I am rooting for the good guys here. For me, the war in Iraq was always about democracy and the necessity of helping it emerge in the Arab-Muslim world. I am thrilled that things have come this far. This is the most interesting drama in the world today, but it's not over, because the forces opposing it are deep and virulent -- virulent enough to stall it in the Arab world and to make it dysfunctional in Israel.In Israel, the question is whether its democratic system can sustain the monumental decision to withdraw unilaterally from the Gaza Strip and all the Israeli settlements there. For the Iraqis, Palestinians and Lebanese, the question is whether these multiethnic communities can produce, through horizontal dialogues, a political arena where monumental decisions can be made -- decisions that are essential if these societies are to progress in the modern age. In short, can Arab society give birth to infant democracy in order to get healthy, and can Israel's adolescent democracy survive a monumental decision required for its society to stay healthy?Let's start with the Jews. One of the criticisms leveled at Ariel Sharon over his decision to withdraw unilaterally from Gaza is that he has never fully spelled out the reasons for his epiphany. After all, Mr. Sharon not only helped build many of these settlements, but he consistently proclaimed the need to hold onto them, for security reasons, forever.A leading Israeli columnist, Nahum Barnea of Yediot Aharonot, once described Mr. Sharon's sudden turnaround by quoting a lyric from a famous Israeli pop song: ''What you see from here, you don't see from there.''What Mr. Barnea meant was that when Mr. Sharon finally became prime minister, with full responsibility for the Jewish state, he had to face squarely the reality that his predecessors had faced: the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza was eroding the moral fiber of the Israeli Army, and, if sustained, would result in an apartheid situation -- a minority of Jews would be ruling over a majority of Arabs between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea.The Jewish settler movement in Israel has always been a minority. The Israeli majority went along with it -- as long as there was no price. But now the price has become inescapable.''There is something quite stunning when you think about it,'' the Israeli political theorist Yaron Ezrahi remarked. ''Three Israeli prime ministers, [Yitzhak] Rabin, [Ehud] Barak and Sharon -- all of them army generals, two from Labor, one from Likud -- all came to the same conclusion: that the occupation was unsustainable [from the point of view of] Israel's national defense.'' As a result, they all shifted from focusing on ''wars of necessity to focusing on a peace of necessity,'' Mr. Ezrahi added. Mr. Sharon doesn't want to explain this about-face publicly, in part, I assume, because it suggests weakness -- that Israel can't keep doing what it has been doing, and knows it.But this withdrawal is a threat to the Jewish religious nationalists. Their goal is not peace, but to conquer Israeli society with their messianic vision and biblical map. They killed Mr. Rabin for getting in their way and have threatened to do the same to Mr. Sharon. Some of these settlers will not go down quietly.Ditto in the Arab world. Democratic politics in the West is about horizontal bargaining between parties and civic organizations. Politics in places like Iraq and Palestine have been based for decades on ''Oriental despotism'' -- top-down monologues by dictators buttressed by a politics of fear. What Iraqis and Palestinians are trying to do is make a transition from one system to the other. But the fundamentalists and Nasserites within their societies -- who for years have been nourished by their Oriental despots as a way of keeping the people backward, divided and focused on the wrong things -- are still powerful and virulent. They, too, will not go quietly. The more they are seen to be losing, the crazier they will get.So this story is not over by a long shot. The birth of democracy in the Arab world and the sustaining of democracy in Israel are now on the table. I am an optimist about both in the long run -- but brace yourself for the short run.Op-Ed ColumnistNew York Times columnists are not allowed to endorse U.S. presidential candidates. Only the editorial page does that. But in checking the columnist rule book, I couldn't find any ban on endorsing a candidate for prime minister of Britain. So I'm officially rooting for Tony Blair.I've never met Mr. Blair. But reading the British press, it strikes me that he's not much loved by Fleet Street. He's not much loved by the left wing of his own Labor Party either, and he certainly doesn't have any supporters on the Conservative benches. Yet he seems to be heading for re-election to a third term on May 5.Indeed, I believe that history will rank Mr. Blair as one of the most important British prime ministers ever -- both for what he has accomplished at home and for what he has dared to do abroad. There is much the U.S. Democratic Party could learn from Mr. Blair.First, you don't have to be a conservative to be a conviction politician. For years Mr. Blair was derided by the press as ''Tony Blur'' -- a man of no fixed principles, all sizzle and no beef, who dressed up the Labor Party as ''New Labor,'' like putting lipstick on a pig, but never really made the hard choices or changes. The reality is quite different.In deciding to throw in Britain's lot with President Bush on the Iraq war, Mr. Blair not only defied the overwhelming antiwar sentiment of his own party, but public opinion in Britain generally. ''Blair risked complete self-immolation on a principle,'' noted Will Marshall, president of the Progressive Policy Institute, a pro-Democratic U.S. think tank.Remember, in the darkest hours of the Iraq drama, when things were looking disastrous (and there have been many such hours), Mr. Bush could always count on the embrace of his own party and the U.S. conservative media machine and think tanks.Tony Blair, by contrast, dined alone. He had no real support group to fall back on. I'm not even sure his wife supported him on the Iraq war. (I know the feeling!) Nevertheless, Mr. Blair took a principled position to depose Saddam and keep Britain tightly aligned with America. He did so, among other reasons, because he believed that the advance of freedom and the defeat of fascism -- whether Islamo-fascism or Nazi fascism -- were quintessential and indispensable ''liberal'' foreign policy goals.The other very real thing Mr. Blair has done is to get the Labor Party in Britain to firmly embrace the free market and globalization -- sometimes kicking and screaming. He has reconfigured Labor politics around a set of policies designed to get the most out of globalization and privatization for British workers, while cushioning the harshest side effects, rather than trying to hold onto bankrupt Socialist ideas or wallowing in the knee-jerk antiglobalism of the reactionary left.The strong British economy that Mr. Blair and his deft finance minister, Gordon Brown, have engineered has led to spending on health and education -- as well as on transportation and law and order -- that has increased ''much faster than under the Conservatives,'' The Financial Times noted on Wednesday. ''The result has been numerous new and refurbished schools, dozens of new hospitals, tens of thousands of extra staff and much new equipment.''And these improvements, which still have a way to go, have all been accomplished so far with few tax increases. The vibrant British economy and welfare-to-work programs have, in turn, resulted in the lowest unemployment in Britain in 30 years. This has led to higher tax receipts and helped the government pay down its national debt. This, in turn, has saved money on both interest and welfare benefits -- money that has been plowed back into services, The Financial Times explained.In sum, Tony Blair has redefined British liberalism. He has made liberalism about embracing, managing and cushioning globalization, about embracing and expanding freedom -- through muscular diplomacy where possible and force where necessary -- and about embracing fiscal discipline.Along the way, he has deftly eviscerated the Conservatives, leaving them with only their most fringe policies -- another reason American Democrats could learn a lot from him. Their own ambivalence toward globalization and the new New Deal our country needs to make more Americans educated and employable in a world without walls, and their own ambivalence toward muscular diplomacy, cost Democrats just enough votes in the American center to allow a mistake-prone Bush team to squeak by in 2004. So if Mr. Blair does win in the U.K., I sure hope that Democrats in the U.S. are taking notes.Op-Ed ColumnistMy biggest problem with nominating John Bolton as U.N. ambassador boils down to one simple fact: he's not the best person for the job -- not even close. If President George W. Bush wants a die-hard Republican at the U.N., one who has a conservative pedigree he can trust, who is close to the president, who can really build coalitions, who knows the U.N. building and bureaucracy inside out, who can work well with the State Department and who has the respect of America's friends and foes alike, the choice is obvious, and it's not John Bolton.It's George H.W. Bush, aka 41. No one would make a better U.N. ambassador for Bush 43 than Bush 41.Look, John Quincy Adams went back to Congress after he served as president. Why shouldn't George H.W. Bush take another spin around the diplomatic dance floor he loved so much and where he left his biggest mark? He's already demonstrated with his parachute jumps that he has the stamina for the job, and his performance as a tsunami relief ambassador was a great success.But there is actually an even better reason to prefer 41 over Mr. Bolton. The White House claims it needs the pugnacious Mr. Bolton at the U.N. to whip it into shape and oversee real reform there. I have only one thing to say in response to that pablum: Give me a break. We do not need a U.N. ambassador to ''reform'' the U.N. That is not what America needs or wants from the U.N. You want to reform the U.N.? You want to analyze its budgets and overhaul its bureaucratic processes, well, then hire McKinsey & Co. -- not John Bolton. (Everyone knows he prefers to torch the place.)''Reforming the U.N.'' is without question one of the most tired, vacuous conservative mantras ever invented. It is right up there with squeezing ''waste, fraud and abuse'' out of the Pentagon's budget. If the White House is concerned about waste, fraud and abuse, let's start with Tom DeLay and our own House.Sorry, but we don't need a management consultant as our U.N. ambassador. What we need is someone who can get the most out of what the U.N. does offer to America. There is no secret about the U.N. -- at its worst it is a talking shop, where a lot of people don't speak English and where they occasionally do ridiculous things, like appoint Libya to oversee human rights, and even mendacious things, like declaring Zionism to be racism.But at its best, the U.N. has been, and still can be, a useful amplifier of American power, helping us to accomplish important global tasks that we deem to be in our own interest.The U.N. still represents the closest thing we have to a global Good Housekeeping seal of approval for any international action. Whenever the U.S. is able to enlist that U.N. seal on its side, America's actions abroad have more legitimacy, more supporters and more paying partners.If we had engineered more of a U.N. seal of approval before going into Iraq, we would have had more allies to share the $300 billion price tag and more legitimacy, which translate into more time and space to accomplish our goals there. It's not a disaster that we went into Iraq without the U.N., but life would probably have been a lot easier (and cheaper) had we been escorted by a real U.N. coalition.In short, I don't much care how the U.N. works as a bureaucracy; I care about how often it can be enlisted to support, endorse and amplify U.S. power. That is what serves our national interest. And because that is what I want most from the U.N., I want at the U.N. an ambassador who can be a real coalition builder, a superdiplomat who can more often than not persuade the U.N.'s member states to act in support of U.S. interests.I can't think of anyone better than George H.W. Bush, with his diplomatic Rolodex and instincts, or worse than John Bolton. Mr. Bolton's tenure overseeing U.S. antiproliferation efforts at the State Department is a mixed bag: success with Libya, utter failure with North Korea and Iran. But no one can miss the teacher's note at the bottom of his report card: ''Does not play well with others who disagree with him.''I have no problem with Mr. Bolton's being given another job or being somehow retained in the job he already has. He's been a faithful public servant. But why would you appoint him to be ambassador at an institution he has nothing but contempt for, to do a job he has no apparent skills for?President 43 only needs to call home to find the right man for the job in President 41. And if 41 isn't available, well, then maybe he should try his sidekick, 42.Op-Ed ColumnistOne of America's most important entrepreneurs recently gave a remarkable speech at a summit meeting of our nation's governors. Bill Gates minced no words. ''American high schools are obsolete,'' he told the governors. ''By obsolete, I don't just mean that our high schools are broken, flawed and underfunded. By obsolete, I mean that our high schools -- even when they are working exactly as designed -- cannot teach our kids what they need to know today.''Training the work force of tomorrow with the high schools of today is like trying to teach kids about today's computers on a 50-year-old mainframe. Our high schools were designed 50 years ago to meet the needs of another age. Until we design them to meet the needs of the 21st century, we will keep limiting -- even ruining -- the lives of millions of Americans every year.''Let me translate Mr. Gates's words: ''If we don't fix American education, I will not be able to hire your kids.'' I consider that, well, kind of important. Alas, the media squeezed a few mentions of it between breaks in the Michael Jackson trial. But neither Tom DeLay nor Bill Frist called a late-night session of Congress -- or even a daytime one -- to discuss what Mr. Gates was saying. They were too busy pandering to those Americans who don't even believe in evolution.And the president stayed fixated on privatizing Social Security. It's no wonder that the second Bush term is shaping up as ''The Great Waste of Time.''On foreign policy, President Bush has offered a big idea: the expansion of freedom, particularly in the Arab-Muslim world, where its absence was one of the forces propelling 9/11. That is a big, bold and compelling idea -- worthy of a presidency and America's long-term interests.But on the home front, this team has no big idea -- certainly none that relates to the biggest challenge and opportunity facing us today: the flattening of the global economic playing field in a way that is allowing more people from more places to compete and collaborate with your kids and mine than ever before.''For the first time in our history, we are going to face competition from low-wage, high-human-capital communities, embedded within India, China and Asia,'' President Lawrence Summers of Harvard told me. In order to thrive, ''it will not be enough for us to just leave no child behind. We also have to make sure that many more young Americans can get as far ahead as their potential will take them. How we meet this challenge is what will define our nation's political economy for the next several decades.''Indeed, we can't rely on importing the talent we need anymore -- not in a flat world where people can now innovate without having to emigrate. In Silicon Valley today, ''B to B'' and ''B to C'' stand for ''back to Bangalore'' and ''back to China,'' which is where a lot of our foreign talent is moving.Meeting this challenge requires a set of big ideas. If you want to grasp some of what is required, check out a smart new book by the strategists John Hagel III and John Seely Brown entitled ''The Only Sustainable Edge.'' They argue that comparative advantage today is moving faster than ever from structural factors, like natural resources, to how quickly a country builds its distinctive talents for innovation and entrepreneurship -- the only sustainable edge.Economics is not like war. It can always be win-win. ''But some win more than others,'' Mr. Hagel said, and today it will be those countries that are best and fastest at building, attracting and holding talent.There is a real sense of urgency in India and China about ''catching up'' in talent-building. America, by contrast, has become rather complacent. ''People go to Shanghai or Bangalore and they look around and say, 'They're still way behind us,''' Mr. Hagel said. ''But it's not just about current capabilities. It's about the relative pace and trajectories of capability-building.''You have to look at where Shanghai was just three years ago, see where it is today and then extrapolate forward. Compare the pace and trajectory of talent-building within their population and businesses and the pace and trajectory here.''India and China know they can't just depend on low wages, so they are racing us to the top, not the bottom. Producing a comprehensive U.S. response -- encompassing immigration, intellectual property law and educational policy -- to focus on developing our talent in a flat world is a big idea worthy of a presidency. But it would also require Mr. Bush to do something he has never done: ask Americans to do something hard.Op-Ed ColumnistIn the last few weeks not only has Iraq been destabilized by days with multiple suicide bombers, but Egypt and Saudi Arabia have also witnessed similar attacks by jihadist fanatics. How do you get so many people to commit suicide on demand, day after day? What's going on?In part the Arab-Muslim world is reaping something it sowed. Way too many Arab intellectuals and religious and political leaders were ready to extol suicide bombing when it was directed against Israelis. Now they are seeing how this weapon of nihilism -- once sanctified and glorified -- can be used against their own societies. It was wrong when it was used against Jews, and it is wrong when it is used against Muslims. You can't build a decent society on the graves of suicide bombers and their victims.But these bombings are also signs of the deeper struggle that the U.S. attempt to erect democracy in Iraq has touched off. My friend Raymond Stock, the biographer and translator of Naguib Mahfouz and a longtime resident of Cairo, argues that we are seeing in Baghdad, Cairo and Riyadh the modern incarnation of several deeply rooted and interlocking wars. These are, he said, the war within Islam between Traditionalists and Rationalists, which dates back to Baghdad in the ninth century; the struggle between ardent Sunnis and Shiites, which dates back to succession battles in early Islam; and the confrontation between Islam and the West, which dates back to the Arab conquests of the seventh century and the Crusades.In the modern incarnation of each of these struggles, members of the Sunni-Traditionalist-jihadist minority are losing. And the more that becomes evident, the more violent they will become -- because their whole vision is in danger of being repudiated by fellow Arabs and Muslims.''The Iraqi election was a total shock to the militant jihadist forces in the Arab-Muslim world,'' Mr. Stock noted. ''They warned Iraqis that 'you vote -- you die,' and instead millions of Iraqis said back to them, 'We vote -- we decide.''' And the thing they are deciding on is not to be pro-American, not to be pro-Western, but to try to build their own Arab society in a way that will be open to modernism and interpretations of Islam that encourage innovation, adaptation and progress.The jihadist forces hate this notion. They see the struggle for democracy in Iraq as anathema to everything they stand for: a literalist interpretation of Islam, unsullied by modernity, adaptation, women's rights or political and religious pluralism.Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, the Jordanian-born jihadist behind much of the Iraq violence, spelled it all out in his declaration last January. Democracy must be opposed, he said, because it is based ''on the right to choose your religion,'' and that is ''against the rule of God.'' He added: ''Oh, people of Iraq, where is your honor? Have you accepted oppression of the Crusader harlots?''Zarqawi and his Saudi and Egyptian allies are trying to defeat America and its allies in the heart of the Arab-Muslim world, but Zarqawi & Co. are losing -- and they know it.Having lost the argument with their own community, and unable to offer any program, the Sunni-Traditionalist-jihadists seem to have become totally unhinged, with people becoming suicide bombers at the rate of three and four a day.The jihadists ''know that if democracy comes to this part of the world, the Zarqawis and their ilk are done,'' Mr. Stock said. ''Because the majority of people do not buy their methods or most of their message. They don't want to live like the Taliban. If democracy manages to spread in the Arab world, it will not necessarily be pro-American, but it will definitely be pro-living, not pro-suicide. It will not be a cult of death, but a culture of life.'' A recent cover of a popular Egyptian magazine, Rose el-Youssef, Mr. Stock noted, shows two well-known female Arab pop singers under the headline: ''Stronger than Extremism.''So yes, this is a big, deep struggle in Iraq. Yes, the forces of decency and pluralism are slowly winning. But it is not over -- not by a long shot. The U.S. Army and the first freely elected Iraqi government still do not control all the terrain there. Unless we can help the Iraqis create a secure environment in their country, and unless their new government can find a way to integrate the more pragmatic Sunni Baathists, and even dejected jihadists, who want to be part of a better future for Iraq, that nation will not see self-sustaining democracy. The bad guys won't win, but neither will the good guys, and all we will have produced is a bloody stalemate.Op-Ed ColumnistMany authors hate to go on grinding book tours. But I've always found it a useful way to be a foreign correspondent in America and take the pulse of the country. Here are the two most important things I learned from a recent book tour:First, many educated people seem to be getting their news from Comedy Central. Say what? As any author will tell you, the best TV book shows to be on have long been Don Imus, Charlie Rose, C-Span, Tim Russert on CNBC, ''Today,'' Oprah and selected programs on CNN, Fox and MSNBC. They are all still huge. But what was new for me on this tour was the number of people who also mentioned getting their news from Jon Stewart's truly funny news satire, ''The Daily Show.'' And I am not just talking about college kids. I am talking about grandmas. Just how many people are now getting their only TV news from Comedy Central is not clear to me -- but it is a lot, lot more than you think.Second, and this may be related to the first, there's a huge undertow of worry out in the country about how our kids are being educated and whether they'll be able to find jobs in an increasingly flat world, where more Chinese, Indians and Russians than ever can connect, collaborate and compete with us. In three different cities I had parents ask me some version of: ''My daughter [or son] is studying Chinese in high school. That's the right thing to do, isn't it?''Not being an educator, I can't give any such advice. But my own research has taught me that the most important thing you can learn in this era of heightened global competition is how to learn. Being really good at ''learning how to learn,'' as President Bill Brody of Johns Hopkins put it, will be an enormous asset in an era of rapid change and innovation, when new jobs will be phased in and old ones phased out faster than ever.O.K., one ninth grader in St. Paul asked me, then ''what courses should I take?'' How do you learn how to learn? Hmm. Maybe, I said, the best way to learn how to learn is to go ask your friends: ''Who are the best teachers?'' Then -- no matter the subject -- take their courses. When I think back on my favorite teachers, I don't remember anymore much of what they taught me, but I sure remember being excited about learning it.What has stayed with me are not the facts they imparted, but the excitement about learning they inspired. To learn how to learn, you have to love learning -- while some people are born with that gene, many others can develop it with the right teacher (or parent).There was a great piece in the April 24 Education Life section of The New York Times that described Britney Schmidt, a student at the University of Arizona who was utterly bored with her courses, mostly because her professors seemed interested only in giving lectures and leaving. ''I was getting A's in all my classes, but I wasn't being challenged, and I wasn't thinking about new things,'' she said.She had to take a natural science course, though, and it turned out to have a great professor and teaching assistants, who inspired her. ''I was lucky,'' she said. ''I took a class from somebody who really cared.'' The result: a scientist was born. Ms. Schmidt has since been accepted to graduate school at U.C.L.A. in planetary physics and the University of Chicago in cosmo-chemistry.I just interviewed Craig Barrett, the chief executive of Intel, which has invested millions of dollars in trying to improve the way science is taught in U.S. schools. (The Wall Street Journal noted yesterday that China is graduating four times the number of engineers as the U.S.; Japan, with less than half our population, graduates double the number.)In today's flat world, Mr. Barrett said, Intel can be a totally successful company without ever hiring another American. That is not its desire or intention, he said, but the fact is that it can now hire the best brain talent ''wherever it resides.''If you look at where Intel is making its new engineering investments today, he said, it is in China, India, Russia, Poland and, to a lesser extent, Malaysia and Israel. While cutting-edge talent is still being grown in America, he added, it's not enough for Intel's needs, and not enough is being done in U.S. public schools -- not just to leave no child behind, but to make sure that the best students and teachers are nurtured and rewarded.Look at the attention Congress has focused on steroids in Major League Baseball, Mr. Barrett mused. And then look at the attention it has focused on science education in minor-league American schools.That's the real news out there, folks. And it's not funny.Op-Ed ColumnistIn his book ''The Ideas That Conquered the World,'' Michael Mandelbaum tells a story about a young girl who is eating dinner at a friend's house and her friend's mother asks her if she likes brussels sprouts. ''Yes, of course,'' the girl says. ''I like brussels sprouts.'' After dinner, though, the mother notices that the girl hasn't eaten a single sprout. ''I thought you liked brussels sprouts,'' the mother said. ''I do,'' answered the girl, ''but not enough to actually eat them.''Mr. Mandelbaum, who teaches foreign policy at Johns Hopkins, related that story to me during a conversation about the two greatest nuclear proliferation threats we face today: North Korea and Iran. Readers of this column know that I rarely write about nuclear proliferation. It is not because I am not interested. I am. It is not because I think it isn't a grave danger. It is. The reason I don't write about it much is because the solution is so ridiculously obvious there isn't much to say. Here's what I mean:North Korea's nuclear program could be stopped tomorrow by the country that provides roughly half of North Korea's energy and one-third of its food supplies -- and that is China.All China has to say to Kim Jong Il is: ''You will shut down your nuclear weapons program and put all your reactors under international inspection, or we will turn off your lights, cut off your heat and put your whole country on a diet. Have we made ourselves clear?'' One thing we know about China -- it knows how to play hardball when it wants to, and if China played hardball that way with North Korea, the proliferation threat from Pyongyang would be over.Ditto Europe vis-à-vis Iran. If the European Union said to the Iranians: ''You will shut down your nuclear weapons program and put all your reactors and related facilities under international inspection or you will face a total economic boycott from Europe. Which part of this sentence don't you understand?'' Trust me, that is the kind of explicit threat that would get Tehran's attention. Short of that, the Iranians will dicker over their nuclear carpets forever.So why haven't China and the E.U. said these things? ''Like that girl with the brussels sprouts,'' Mr. Mandelbaum said, ''the Chinese and the Europeans are all for combating nuclear proliferation -- just not enough actually to do something about it.''At the end of the day, the Chinese would rather live with a nuclear North Korea than risk a collapsed nonnuclear North Korea, and the Europeans would rather live with a nuclear Iran -- that Europe can make all kinds of money off of -- rather than risk losing Iran's business to prevent it from going nuclear. The Chinese and the Europeans ''each assume that in the end, the U.S. will deter both the North Koreans and the Iranians anyway, so why worry,'' Mr. Mandelbaum said.Are the Europeans and Chinese behaving cynically? Of course, these are the very countries constantly complaining about U.S. ''hegemony,'' and calling for a ''multipolar world.'' Yet the only thing they are really interested in being a pole for is to oppose the U.S. -- not to actually do something hard themselves to stabilize the global system.The prevailing assumption in Washington is that if something really big is going wrong -- like North Korea and Iran going nuclear -- it must be because America messed up. Yes, the Bush nonproliferation policy has been pretty dysfunctional, but the real problem is that those parties with the leverage to make a diplomatic difference refuse to use it. (We have already largely isolated Iran and North Korea. There is nothing much more America can threaten, short of using force.)This is not a joke. If North Korea and Iran both go nuclear, that step may trigger a major realignment of geopolitics -- the likes of which has not been seen since the end of the cold war. If North Korea sets off a nuclear test, how long will Japan continue relying on the U.S. for its nuclear shield? And what will South Korea and Taiwan do? And if Japan or South Korea goes nuclear, how may an anxious China react? And if Shiite Iran becomes a nuclear power -- in tandem with Iraq's being run by Shiites -- the Sunni Arab world will go nuts, not to mention the Israelis. Will Saudi Arabia then feel compelled to acquire a nuclear deterrent? Will Egypt?We're talking nuclear dominoes.So there you have it -- my annual nonproliferation column. Unless China and Europe get serious about the problem, it's not going to get fixed. And for now, neither one seems to be ready or willing to eat its brussels sprouts.Op-Ed ColumnistFor so many years, America's economy was so dominant on the world stage, so out front in so many key areas, that we fell into the habit of thinking we were competing largely against ourselves. If we fell behind in one area or another -- whether it was math and science skills, broadband capacity or wireless infrastructure -- we took the view that: ''Oh well, we'll fix that problem when we get to it. After all, we're just competing against ourselves.''In recent years, though, with the flattening of the global playing field, it should be apparent that we are not just competing against ourselves. The opening of China, India and Russia means that young people in these countries can increasingly plug and play -- connect, collaborate and compete -- more easily and cheaply than ever before. And they are. We, alas, are still coasting along as if we have all the time in the world.I helped teach a course at Harvard last semester on globalization, and one day a student told me this story: He was part of a student-run collaboration between students in the U.S. and China. The American and Chinese students had recently started working together by using Skype, the popular, freely downloadable, software that enables you to make free phone calls over the Internet to other Skype users. But what was most interesting, the student told me, was that it was the Chinese students who introduced their U.S. counterparts to Skype. And, he noted, these Chinese students were not from major cities, like Beijing, but from smaller towns.On April 7, CNET News.com reported the following: ''The University of Illinois tied for 17th place in the world finals of the Association for Computing Machinery International Collegiate Programming Contest.''That's the lowest ranking for the top-performing U.S. school in the 29-year history of the competition. Shanghai Jiao Tong University of China took top honors this year, followed by Moscow State University and the St. Petersburg Institute of Fine Mechanics and Optics. Those results continued a gradual ascendance of Asian and East European schools during the past decade or so. A U.S. school hasn't won the world championship since 1997, when students at Harvey Mudd College achieved the honor. 'The U.S. used to dominate these kinds of programming Olympics,' said David Patterson, president of the Association for Computing Machinery and a computer science professor at the University of California at Berkeley. 'Now we're sort of falling behind.'''Earlier this week, a special report on the Indiana University High School Survey of Student Engagement, which covered 90,000 high school students in 26 states, was published. The study noted that 18 percent of college-track seniors did not take a math course in their last year in high school -- and that ''more than a fifth (22 percent) of first-year college students require remediation in math.'' Just 56 percent of the students surveyed said they put a great deal of effort into schoolwork; only 43 percent said they worked harder than they had expected.Even though 55 percent said they studied no more than three hours a week, 65 percent of those students reported getting mostly A's and B's.''Students are getting A's and B's, but without studying much,'' Martha McCarthy, the Indiana University professor who headed the study, told me. ''Our fear,'' she added, ''is that when you talk to employers out there, they say they are not getting the skills they need,'' in part because ''the colleges are not getting students with the skills they need.'' Ms. McCarthy said one of the main reasons Indiana did this study is to better inform high school educators about what is going on in their own schools so they can find remedies. All of these shortcomings developed over time, Ms. McCarthy said, but ''we as a nation became complacent about them.''America today reminds me of our last Olympic basketball team -- that lackadaisical group that brought home the bronze medal. We think that all we need to do is show up and everyone else will fold -- because, after all, we're just competing with ourselves.And we think we don't need to get focused and play together like a team, with Democrats and Republicans actually working together. Well, on the basketball court -- and in a flat world, where everyone now has access to all the same coaching techniques, training methods and scouting reports -- a more focused, motivated team always beats a collection of more talented but complacent individuals.Op-Ed ColumnistIt is hard not to notice two contrasting stories that have run side by side during the past week. One is the story about the violent protests in the Muslim world triggered by a report in Newsweek (which the magazine has now retracted) that U.S. interrogators at Guantánamo Bay desecrated a Koran by throwing it into a toilet. In Afghanistan alone, at least 16 people were killed and more than 100 wounded in anti-American rioting that has been linked to that report. I certainly hope that Newsweek story is incorrect, because it would be outrageous if U.S. interrogators behaved that way.That said, though, in the same newspapers one can read the latest reports from Iraq, where Baathist and jihadist suicide bombers have killed 400 Iraqi Muslims in the past month -- most of them Shiite and Kurdish civilians shopping in markets, walking in funerals, going to mosques or volunteering to join the police.Yet these mass murders -- this desecration and dismemberment of real Muslims by other Muslims -- have not prompted a single protest march anywhere in the Muslim world. And I have not read of a single fatwa issued by any Muslim cleric outside Iraq condemning these indiscriminate mass murders of Iraqi Shiites and Kurds by these jihadist suicide bombers, many of whom, according to a Washington Post report, are coming from Saudi Arabia.The Muslim world's silence about the real desecration of Iraqis, coupled with its outrage over the alleged desecration of a Koran, highlights what we are up against in trying to stabilize Iraq -- as well as the only workable strategy going forward.The challenge we face in Iraq is so steep precisely because the power shift the U.S. and its allies are trying to engineer there is so profound -- in both religious and political terms.Religiously, if you want to know how the Sunni Arab world views a Shiite's being elected leader of Iraq, for the first time ever, think about how whites in Alabama would have felt about a black governor's being installed there in 1920. Some Sunnis do not think Shiites are authentic Muslims, and are indifferent to their brutalization.At the same time, politically speaking, some Arab regimes prefer to see the pot boiling in Iraq so the democratization process can never spread to their countries. That's why their official newspapers rarely describe the murders of civilians in Iraq as a massacre or acts of terror. Such crimes are usually sanitized as ''resistance'' to occupation.Salama Na'mat, the Washington bureau chief for the London-based Arabic daily Al Hayat, wrote the other day: ''What is the responsibility of the [Arab] regimes and the official and semiofficial media in the countries bordering Iraq in legitimizing the operations that murder Iraqis? Isn't their goal to thwart [the emergence of] the newborn democracy in Iraq so that it won't spread in the region?'' (Translation by Memri.)In identifying the problem, though, Mr. Na'mat also identifies the solution. If you want to stop a wave of suicide bombing, the likes of which we are seeing in Iraq, it takes a village. I am a big believer that the greatest restraint on human behavior is not laws and police, but culture and religious authority. It is what the community, what the village, deems shameful. That is what restrains people. So how do we get the Sunni Arab village to delegitimize suicide bombers?Inside Iraq, obviously, credible Sunnis have to be brought into the political process and constitution-drafting, as long as they do not have blood on their hands from Saddam's days. And outside Iraq, the Bush team needs to be forcefully demanding that Saudi Arabia and other key Arab allies use their media, government and religious systems to denounce and delegitimize the despicable murder of Muslims by Muslims in Iraq.If the Arab world, its media and its spiritual leaders, came out and forcefully and repeatedly condemned those who mount these suicide attacks, and if credible Sunnis were given their fair share in the Iraqi government, I am certain a lot of this suicide bombing would stop, as happened with the Palestinians. Iraqi Sunnis would pass on the intelligence needed to prevent these attacks, and they would deny the suicide bombers the safe houses they need to succeed.That is the only way it stops, because we don't know who is who. It takes the village -- and right now the Sunni Arab village needs to be pressured and induced to restrain those among them who are engaging in these suicidal murders of innocents.The best way to honor the Koran is to live by the values of mercy and compassion that it propagates.Op-Ed ColumnistThe fact that the White House spokesman Scott McClellan spent part of his briefing on Tuesday excoriating Newsweek -- and telling its editors that they had a responsibility to ''help repair the damage'' to America's standing in the Arab-Muslim world -- while not offering a single word of condemnation for those who went out and killed 16 people in Afghanistan in riots linked to a Newsweek report, pretty much explains why we're struggling to win the war of ideas in the Muslim world today. We are spending way too much time debating with ourselves, or playing defense, and way too little time actually looking Arab Muslims in the eye and telling them the truth as we see it.In part this is because we are so dependent on their oil -- and addicts never tell the truth to their pushers. In part this is because the administration got so carried away by the vote in the Iraqi elections that it lost focus. (We don't even have an ambassador in Iraq at this critical juncture, when it is so important that an ethnically balanced Iraqi government be formed. But don't worry -- John Bolton is going to reform the U.N.)And in part this is because we are afraid to say the truth, because we -- wrongly -- believe these people are incapable of rational thought and will just react violently. Therefore, if we have an information campaign, it must all be about explaining to them who we are, and why we are not bad people, and why Newsweek made a mistake. It must never involve us asking who they are and why they are behaving in ways that don't live up to the values they profess.Instead of sending Mr. McClellan out to flog Newsweek, President Bush should have said: ''Let me say first to all Muslims that desecrating anyone's holy book is utterly wrong. These allegations will be investigated, and any such behavior will be punished. That is how we Americans intend to look in the mirror. But we think the Arab-Muslim world must also look in the mirror when it comes to how it has been behaving toward an even worse crime than the desecration of God's words, and that is the desecration of God's creations. In reaction to an unsubstantiated Newsweek story, Muslims killed 16 other Muslims in Afghanistan in rioting, and no one has raised a peep -- as if it were a totally logical reaction. That is wrong.''In Iraq, where Shiite, Kurdish and Sunni Muslims are struggling to build a pluralistic new order, other Muslims, claiming to act in the name of Allah, are indiscriminately butchering people, without a word of condemnation coming from Muslim spiritual or political leaders. I don't understand a concept of the sacred that says a book is more sacred than a human life. A holy book, whether the Bible or the Koran, is only holy to the extent that it shapes human life and behavior.''Look, Newsweek may have violated journalistic rules, but what jihadist terrorists are doing in Iraq and Afghanistan -- blowing up innocent Muslims struggling to build an alternative society to dictatorship -- surely destroys the Koran. They are the real enemies of Islam because they are depriving Muslims of a better future. From what I know of Islam, it teaches that you show reverence to God by showing reverence for his creations, not just his words. Why don't your spiritual leaders say that? I am asking, because I want to know.''Fortunately, a few courageous Arab intellectuals, such as Abderrahman al-Rashed, have asked such things. Writing in Wednesday's Saudi daily Asharq Al Awsat, he said: ''When thousands in Afghanistan are concerned about a report in a magazine that does not reach them, written in a language they do not speak, leading them to protest in a manner unprecedented among other Islamic nations that do speak English, the matter is worth pursuing further: it tells us more about the dangers of propaganda and its exploitation by opposition groups than it does about spontaneous popular sentiments.''And a few days ago, a group of Iraqi journalists actually went to Jordan and got right in the face of Jordanian columnists and editors, demanding to know why they were treating Muslim mass murderers in Iraq like anticolonial war heroes. It's already changed the tone. That's the war of ideas.The greatest respect we can show to Arabs and Muslims -- and the best way to help Muslim progressives win the war of ideas -- is to take them seriously and stop gazing at our own navels. That means demanding that they answer for their lies, hypocrisy and profane behavior, just as much as we must answer for ours.After six weeks of being a foreign correspondent traveling around America, the biggest question I have come home with is not ''What's the matter with Kansas?'' but rather, ''What's the matter with big business?''America faces a huge set of challenges if it is going to retain its competitive edge. As a nation, we have a mounting education deficit, energy deficit, budget deficit, health care deficit and ambition deficit. The administration is in denial on this, and Congress is off on Mars. And yet, when I look around for the group that has both the power and interest in seeing America remain globally focused and competitive -- America's business leaders -- they seem to be missing in action. I am not worried about the rise of the cultural conservatives. I am worried about the disappearance of an internationalist, pro-American business elite.Is there any company in America that should be more involved in lobbying for some form of national health coverage than General Motors, which is being strangled by its health care costs? Is there any group of companies that should have been picketing the White House more than our high-tech firms, after the Bush team cut the National Science Foundation budget by $100 million in 2005 and in 2006 has proposed shrinking the Department of Energy science programs and basic and applied research in the Department of Defense -- key sources of innovation?Is there any constituency that should be clamoring for a sane energy policy more than U.S. industry? Is there any group that should be mobilizing voters to lobby Congress to pass the Caribbean Free Trade Agreement and complete the Doha round more than U.S. multinationals? Should anyone be more concerned about the fiscally reckless deficits we are leaving our children than Wall Street?Yet, with a few admirable exceptions, American business has not gotten out front on these issues. In part, this is because boardrooms tend to be culturally Republican -- both uncomfortable and a little afraid to challenge this administration. In part, this is because of the post-Enron keep-your-head-down effect. And in part, this is because in today's flatter world, many key U.S. companies now make most of their profits abroad and can increasingly recruit the best talent in the world today without ever hiring another American.So with business with its head in the clouds, labor with its head in the sand, the administration focused on terrorism and Congress catering to people who think ''intelligent design'' is something done by God and not by Intel, it's not surprising that ''we don't have a strategy for making America competitive in the 21st century -- a century of three billion new capitalists,'' as Clyde Prestowitz put it. He is the author of a smart new book about the rise of China and India, called, appropriately, ''Three Billion New Capitalists.''If we don't get our act together, this will affect not just our economy, but also our power. America has just completed the most sweeping transformation of its national security establishment since 1947. ''Unfortunately, the entire restructuring has been oriented toward combating one threat -- terrorism,'' said David Rothkopf, a Carnegie Endowment scholar who has just published a timely and important new book, ''Running the World,'' about the U.S. National Security Council.''This is dramatically different from what was done in the wake of World War II, when, in addition to creating the N.S.C., Department of Defense, Air Force and C.I.A., we also created the U.N., I.M.F., World Bank, conducted the Marshall Plan, rebuilt Japan and recognized that domestic growth was the most important wellspring of our national security.''That domestic strength made us both feared and attractive. Remember: America won the cold war not just with containment, but, even more important, with attraction -- attraction for the society we were building.''Undercutting that attraction with fiscal irresponsibility, inattentiveness to the engines of competitiveness on which future jobs will depend, cavalier treatment of the values that make the American way of life more appealing, closing our borders to the world -- and thus both losing our edge and our understanding of that world -- or focusing exclusively on enemies or the failings of the international community,'' added Mr. Rothkopf, ''is both self-defeating and runs counter to every lesson of how we won the cold war.''But who will tell the people? If not the situation room, it better be the boardroom -- otherwise the costs to our country will exceed anything that can measured on a balance sheet.Op-Ed ColumnistShut it down. Just shut it down.I am talking about the war-on-terrorism P.O.W. camp at Guantánamo Bay. Just shut it down and then plow it under. It has become worse than an embarrassment. I am convinced that more Americans are dying and will die if we keep the Gitmo prison open than if we shut it down. So, please, Mr. President, just shut it down.If you want to appreciate how corrosive Guantánamo has become for America's standing abroad, don't read the Arab press. Don't read the Pakistani press. Don't read the Afghan press. Hop over here to London or go online and just read the British press! See what our closest allies are saying about Gitmo. And when you get done with that, read the Australian press and the Canadian press and the German press.It is all a variation on the theme of a May 8 article in The Observer of London that begins, ''An American soldier has revealed shocking new details of abuse and sexual torture of prisoners at Guantánamo Bay in the first high-profile whistle-blowing account to emerge from inside the top-secret base.'' Google the words ''Guantánamo Bay and Australia'' and what comes up is an Australian ABC radio report that begins: ''New claims have emerged that prisoners at Guantánamo Bay are being tortured by their American captors, and the claims say that Australians David Hicks and Mamdouh Habib are among the victims.''Just another day of the world talking about Guantánamo Bay.Why care? It's not because I am queasy about the war on terrorism. It is because I want to win the war on terrorism. And it is now obvious from reports in my own paper and others that the abuse at Guantánamo and within the whole U.S. military prison system dealing with terrorism is out of control. Tell me, how is it that over 100 detainees have died in U.S. custody so far? Heart attacks? This is not just deeply immoral, it is strategically dangerous.I can explain it best by analogy. For several years now I have argued that Israel needed to get out of the West Bank and Gaza, and behind a wall, as fast as possible. Not because the Palestinians are right and Israel wrong. It's because Israel today is surrounded by three large trends. The first is a huge population explosion happening all across the Arab world. The second is an explosion of the worst interpersonal violence between Israelis and Palestinians in the history of the conflict, which has only recently been defused by a cease-fire. And the third is an explosion of Arabic language multimedia outlets -- from the Internet to Al Jazeera.What was happening around Israel at the height of the intifada was that the Arab multimedia explosion was taking the images of that intifada explosion and feeding them to the Arab population explosion, melding in the minds of a new generation of Arabs and Muslims that their enemies were J.I.A. -- ''Jews, Israel and America.'' That is an enormously toxic trend, and I hope Israel's withdrawal from Gaza will help deprive it of oxygen.I believe the stories emerging from Guantánamo are having a similar toxic effect on us -- inflaming sentiments against the U.S. all over the world and providing recruitment energy on the Internet for those who would do us ill.Husain Haqqani, a thoughtful Pakistani scholar now teaching at Boston University, remarked to me: ''When people like myself say American values must be emulated and America is a bastion of freedom, we get Guantánamo Bay thrown in our faces. When we talk about the America of Jefferson and Hamilton, people back home say to us: 'That is not the America we are dealing with. We are dealing with the America of imprisonment without trial.'''Guantánamo Bay is becoming the anti-Statue of Liberty. If we have a case to be made against any of the 500 or so inmates still in Guantánamo, then it is high time we put them on trial, convict as many possible (which will not be easy because of bungled interrogations) and then simply let the rest go home or to a third country. Sure, a few may come back to haunt us. But at least they won't be able to take advantage of Guantánamo as an engine of recruitment to enlist thousands more. I would rather have a few more bad guys roaming the world than a whole new generation.''This is not about being for or against the war,'' said Michael Posner, the executive director of Human Rights First, which is closely following this issue. ''It is about doing it right. If we are going to transform the Middle East, we have to be law-abiding and uphold the values we want them to embrace -- otherwise it is not going to work.''Op-Ed ColumnistA few years ago my youngest daughter participated in the National History Day program for eighth graders. The question that year was ''turning points'' in history, and schoolchildren across the land were invited to submit a research project that illuminated any turning point in history. My daughter's project was ''How Sputnik Led to the Internet.'' It traced how we reacted to the Russian launch of Sputnik by better networking our scientific research centers and how those early, crude networks spread and eventually were woven into the Internet. The subtext was how our reaction to one turning point unintentionally triggered another decades later.I worry that 20 years from now some eighth grader will be doing her National History Day project on how America's reaction to 9/11 unintentionally led to an erosion of core elements of American identity. What sparks such dark thoughts on a trip from London to New Delhi?In part it is the awful barriers that now surround the U.S. Embassy in London on Grosvenor Square. ''They have these cages all around the embassy now, and these huge concrete blocks, and the whole message is: 'Go away!''' said Kate Jones, a British literary agent who often walks by there. ''That is how people think of America now, and it's a really sad thing because that is not your country.''In part it was a conversation with friends in London, one a professor at Oxford, another an investment banker, both of whom spoke about the hassles, fingerprinting, paperwork and costs that they, pro-American professionals, now must go through to get a visa to the U.S.In part it was a recent chat with the folks at Intel about the obstacles they met trying to get visas for Muslim youths from Pakistan and South Africa who were finalists for this year's Intel science contest. And in part it was a conversation with M.I.T. scientists about the new restrictions on Pentagon research contracts -- in terms of the nationalities of the researchers who could be involved and the secrecy required -- that were constricting their ability to do cutting-edge work in some areas and forcing intellectual capital offshore. The advisory committee of the World Wide Web recently shifted its semiannual meeting from Boston to Montreal so as not to put members through the hassle of getting visas to the U.S.The other day I went to see the play ''Billy Elliot'' in London. During intermission, a man approached me and asked, ''Are you Mr. Friedman?'' When I said yes, he introduced himself -- Emad Tinawi, a Syrian-American working for Booz Allen. He told me that while he disagreed with some things I wrote, there was one column he still keeps. ''It was the one called, 'Where Birds Don't Fly,''' he said.I remembered writing that headline, but I couldn't remember the column. Then he reminded me: It was about the new post-9/11 U.S. Consulate in Istanbul, which looks exactly like a maximum-security prison, so much so that a captured Turkish terrorist said that while his pals considered bombing it, they concluded that the place was so secure that even birds couldn't fly there. Mr. Tinawi and I then swapped impressions about the corrosive impact such security restrictions were having on foreigners' perceptions of America.In New Delhi, the Indian writer Gurcharan Das remarked to me that with each visit to the U.S. lately, he has been forced by border officials to explain why he is coming to America. They ''make you feel so unwanted now,'' said Mr. Das. America was a country ''that was always reinventing itself,'' he added, because it was a country that always welcomed ''all kinds of oddballs'' and had ''this wonderful spirit of openness.'' American openness has always been an inspiration for the whole world, he concluded. ''If you go dark, the world goes dark.''Bottom line: We urgently need a national commission to look at all the little changes we have made in response to 9/11 -- from visa policies to research funding, to the way we've sealed off our federal buildings, to legal rulings around prisoners of war -- and ask this question: While no single change is decisive, could it all add up in a way so that 20 years from now we will discover that some of America's cultural and legal essence -- our DNA as a nation -- has become badly deformed or mutated?This would be a tragedy for us and for the world. Because, as I've argued, where birds don't fly, people don't mix, ideas don't get sparked, friendships don't get forged, stereotypes don't get broken, and freedom doesn't ring.Op-Ed ColumnistIt was extremely revealing traveling from Europe to India as French voters (and now Dutch ones) were rejecting the E.U. constitution -- in one giant snub to President Jacques Chirac, European integration, immigration, Turkish membership in the E.U. and all the forces of globalization that are eating away at Europe's welfare states. It is interesting because French voters are trying to preserve a 35-hour work week in a world where Indian engineers are ready to work a 35-hour day. Good luck.Voters in ''old Europe'' -- France, Germany, the Netherlands and Italy -- seem to be saying to their leaders: stop the world, we want to get off; while voters in India have been telling their leaders: stop the world and build us a stepstool, we want to get on. I feel sorry for Western European blue collar workers. A world of benefits they have known for 50 years is coming apart, and their governments don't seem to have a strategy for coping.One reason French voters turned down the E.U. constitution was rampant fears of ''Polish plumbers.'' Rumors that low-cost immigrant plumbers from Poland were taking over the French plumbing trade became a rallying symbol for anti-E.U. constitution forces. A few weeks ago Franz Müntefering, chairman of Germany's Social Democratic Party, compared private equity firms -- which buy up failing businesses, downsize them and then sell them -- to a ''swarm of locusts.''The fact that a top German politician has resorted to attacking capitalism to win votes tells you just how explosive the next decade in Western Europe could be, as some of these aging, inflexible economies -- which have grown used to six-week vacations and unemployment insurance that is almost as good as having a job -- become more intimately integrated with Eastern Europe, India and China in a flattening world.To appreciate just how explosive, come to Bangalore, India, the outsourcing capital of the world. The dirty little secret is that India is taking work from Europe or America not simply because of low wages. It is also because Indians are ready to work harder and can do anything from answering your phone to designing your next airplane or car. They are not racing us to the bottom. They are racing us to the top.Indeed, there is a huge famine breaking out all over India today, an incredible hunger. But it is not for food. It is a hunger for opportunity that has been pent up like volcanic lava under four decades of socialism, and it's now just bursting out with India's young generation.''India is the oldest civilization, the largest democracy and the youngest population -- almost 70 percent is below age 35 and almost 50 percent is 25 and under,'' said Shekhar Gupta, editor of The Indian Express. Next to India, Western Europe looks like an assisted-living facility with Turkish nurses.Sure, a huge portion of India still lives in wretched slums or villages, but more and more of the young cohort are grasping for something better. A grass-roots movement is now spreading, demanding that English be taught in state schools -- where 85 percent of children go -- beginning in first grade, not fourth grade. ''What's new is where this movement is coming from,'' said the Indian commentator Krishna Prasad. ''It's coming from the farmers and the Dalits, the lowest groups in society.'' Even the poor have been to the cities enough to know that English is now the key to a tech-sector job, and they want their kids to have those opportunities.The Indian state of West Bengal has the oldest elected Communist government left in the world today. Some global technology firms recently were looking at outsourcing there, but told the Communists they could not do so because of the possibility of worker strikes that might disrupt the business processes of the companies they work for. No problem. The Communist government declared information technology work an ''essential service,'' making it illegal for those workers to strike. Have a nice day.''This is not about wages at all -- the whole wage differential thing is going to reduce very quickly,'' said Rajesh Rao, who heads Dhruva, the innovative Indian game company. It is about people who have been starving ''finally seeing the ability to realize their dreams.'' Both Infosys and Wipro, India's leading technology firms, received more than one million applications last year for a little more than 10,000 job openings.Yes, this is a bad time for France and friends to lose their appetite for hard work -- just when India, China and Poland are rediscovering theirs.Op-Ed ColumnistEvery time I visit India, Indians always ask me to compare India with China. Lately, I have responded like this: If India and China were both highways, the Chinese highway would be a six-lane, perfectly paved road, but with a huge speed bump off in the distance labeled ''Political reform: how in the world do we get from Communism to a more open society?'' When 1.3 billion people going 80 miles an hour hit a speed bump, one of two things happens: Either the car flies into the air and slams down, and all the parts hold together and it keeps on moving -- or the car flies into the air, slams down and all the wheels fall off. Which it will be with China, I don't know. India, by contrast, is like a highway full of potholes, with no sidewalks and half the streetlamps broken. But off in the distance, the road seems to smooth out, and if it does, this country will be a dynamo. The question is: Is that smoother road in the distance a mirage or the real thing?At first blush, coming back to Bangalore, India's Silicon Valley, that smoother road seems like a mirage. The infrastructure here is still a total mess. But looks can be deceiving. Beneath the mess, Bangalore is entering a mature new phase as a technology center by starting to produce its own high-tech products, research, venture capital firms and start-ups.''The ecosystem for innovation is now starting to be created here,'' said Nandan Nilekani, the C.E.O. of Infosys. For several years now, when venture capitalists funded companies in the U.S., they insisted that the R.&D. for the products be done in India. But now, increasingly, Western companies will come up with a new idea and then tell Infosys, Wipro or Tata, India's premier technology companies, to research, develop and produce the whole thing.As one Wipro executive put it, ''You go from solving my problem to serving my business to knowing my business to being my business.'' What will be left for the Western companies is the ''ideation,'' the original concept and design of a flagship product (which is a big deal), and then the sales and marketing.''We're going from a model of doing piecework to where the entire product and entire innovation stream is done by companies here,'' Mr. Nilekani added. All of this means that innovation will happen faster and cheaper, with much more global collaboration.The best indication that Bangalore is becoming hot is how many foreign techies -- non-Indians -- are now coming here to work. P.Anandan, an Indian-American who worked for Microsoft for 28 years in Redmond, Wash., just opened Microsoft's research center in Bangalore, which follows the ones in Redmond, Cambridge and Beijing.''I have two non-Indians working for me here, one Japanese and one American, and they could work anywhere in the world,'' Mr. Anandan said. He added that when he got his engineering degree in India 28 years ago, all the competition was to get a job abroad. Now the fiercest competition is to get an I.T. job in India: ''It is no longer, 'Well I have to stay here,' but, 'Do I get a chance to stay here?'''In the past year, Infosys received 9,600 applications from abroad, including from China, France and Germany, for internships, and it accepted 100. I asked one of these interns, Vicki Chen, a Chinese-American business student from the Claremont Colleges, why she came. ''All the business is coming to India, and I don't see why I shouldn't follow the business,'' she said. ''If this is where the center of gravity is, you should go check it out, and then you become more valuable.''Even more interesting is how Indian firms are taking the skills they learned from outsourcing and using them to develop low-cost products for the low-wage Indian market: a medical insurance plan for the poor for as little as $10 a year, a $2,000 car, a $200 laptop, supercheap cellphones, a low-fare airline ($75 one-way for the three-hour Bangalore-Delhi flight) that sells tickets from Internet kiosks in gas stations. Indian companies know that if they can make money producing low-cost technology for poor Indians, it gives them an incredible platform to then take these products global. (Imagine the profit potential if they work in the West?) China is doing the exact same thing.Indeed, I now understand why, when China's prime minister, Wen Jiabao, visited India for the first time last April, he didn't fly into the capital, New Delhi -- as foreign leaders usually do. He flew directly from Beijing to Bangalore -- for a tech-tour -- and then went on to New Delhi.No U.S. president or vice president has ever visited Bangalore.Op-Ed ColumnistYou don't expect to learn much at a graduation ceremony -- especially if you're the commencement speaker. But I learned about a truly important program at the Williams College graduation last Sunday.Every year, in addition to granting honorary degrees, Williams also honors four high school teachers. But not just any high school teachers. Williams asks the 500 or so members of its senior class to nominate the high school teachers who had a profound impact on their lives. Then each year a committee goes through the roughly 50 student nominations, does its own research with the high schools involved and chooses the four most inspiring teachers.Each of the four teachers is given $2,000, plus a $1,000 donation to his or her high school. The winners and their families are then flown to Williams, located in the lush Berkshires, and honored as part of the graduation weekend.On the day before last Sunday's graduation, all four of the high school teachers, and the students who nominated them, sat on stage at a campuswide event, and the dean of the college talked about how and why each high school teacher had influenced the Williams student, reading from the students' nominating letters. Later, the four teachers were introduced at a dinner along with the honorary degree recipients.''Every time we do this, one of the [high school] teachers says to me, 'This is one of the great weekends of my life,''' said Williams's president, Morton Owen Schapiro. ''But it is great for us, too. ...''When you are at a place like Williams and you are able to benefit from these wonderful kids, sometimes you take it for granted. You think we produce these kids. But as faculty members, we should always be reminded that we stand on the shoulders of great high school teachers, we get great material to work with: well educated, well trained, with a thirst for learning.''So we have been doing our little part to recognize that. ... We take these teachers, who are not well compensated and often underappreciated, and give them a great weekend.''If you think these awards are not important for the teachers receiving them, then you don't know anything about teachers.I hurried to get my cap and gown off so I could interview Myra Loris, an international relations teacher at Highland Park High School, north of Chicago, who specializes in preparing kids to take part in the Model U.N. program. She was nominated by Alice Brown, a Williams senior who said in her nominating letter that Ms. Loris was a ''very important teacher, role model and mentor. ... Myra has inspired many students, like me, to pursue careers in law, international relations and political advocacy.''When she got the call from Williams saying she had won, Ms. Loris recalled, ''I just kept saying, 'Wow.''' A teacher for 23 years, now nearing retirement, she added, ''I just found it very affirming in a Zenlike way,'' an acknowledgement ''that my days have value, my life has had some worth. Public school teachers don't get that very often,'' especially with No Child Left Behind restrictions, which now require teachers to teach to the tests, and push out the window ''all those things that really spark kids imaginations'' -- like art and music.Ms. Loris added, ''A lot of my young colleagues were really excited and pleased for me, and everyone wants to hear when I get back what happened -- and that is really important, because we are not getting people rushing into education. We send 90 percent of our kids on to college, but if you ask how many of them think of being teachers, you will get six kids. ...''There are great teachers in our high school, outstanding teachers, and they don't get enough recognition. A lot of kids would not be in college without them.''We are heading into an age in which jobs are likely to be invented and made obsolete faster and faster. The chances of today's college kids working in the same jobs for the same companies for their whole careers are about zero. In such an age, the greatest survival skill you can have is the ability to learn how to learn. The best way to learn how to learn is to love to learn, and the best way to love to learn is to have great teachers who inspire.And the best way to ensure that we have teachers who inspire their students is if we recognize and reward those who clearly have done so.Imagine if every college in America had a program like Williams's, and every spring, across the land, thousands of great teachers were acknowledged by the students they inspired? ''No Great Teachers Left Behind.'' How about it?Op-Ed ColumnistEver since Iraq's remarkable election, the country has been descending deeper and deeper into violence. But no one in Washington wants to talk about it. Conservatives don't want to talk about it because, with a few exceptions, they think their job is just to applaud whatever the Bush team does. Liberals don't want to talk about Iraq because, with a few exceptions, they thought the war was wrong and deep down don't want the Bush team to succeed. As a result, Iraq is drifting sideways and the whole burden is being carried by our military. The rest of the country has gone shopping, which seems to suit Karl Rove just fine.Well, we need to talk about Iraq. This is no time to give up -- this is still winnable -- but it is time to ask: What is our strategy? This question is urgent because Iraq is inching toward a dangerous tipping point -- the point where the key communities begin to invest more energy in preparing their own militias for a scramble for power -- when everything falls apart, rather than investing their energies in making the hard compromises within and between their communities to build a unified, democratizing Iraq.Our core problem in Iraq remains Donald Rumsfeld's disastrous decision -- endorsed by President Bush -- to invade Iraq on the cheap. From the day the looting started, it has been obvious that we did not have enough troops there. We have never fully controlled the terrain. Almost every problem we face in Iraq today -- the rise of ethnic militias, the weakness of the economy, the shortages of gas and electricity, the kidnappings, the flight of middle-class professionals -- flows from not having gone into Iraq with the Powell Doctrine of overwhelming force.Yes, yes, I know we are training Iraqi soldiers by the battalions, but I don't think this is the key. Who is training the insurgent-fascists? Nobody. And yet they are doing daily damage to U.S. and Iraqi forces. Training is overrated, in my book. Where you have motivated officers and soldiers, you have an army punching above its weight. Where you don't have motivated officers and soldiers, you have an army punching a clock.Where do you get motivated officers and soldiers? That can come only from an Iraqi leader and government that are seen as representing all the country's main factions. So far the Iraqi political class has been a disappointment. The Kurds have been great. But the Sunni leaders have been shortsighted at best and malicious at worst, fantasizing that they are going to make a comeback to power through terror. As for the Shiites, their spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, has been a positive force on the religious side, but he has no political analog. No Shiite Hamid Karzai has emerged.''We have no galvanizing figure right now,'' observed Kanan Makiya, the Iraqi historian who heads the Iraq Memory Foundation. ''Sistani's counterpart on the democratic front has not emerged. Certainly, the Americans made many mistakes, but at this stage less and less can be blamed on them. The burden is on Iraqis. And we still have not risen to the magnitude of the opportunity before us.''I still don't know if a self-sustaining, united and democratizing Iraq is possible. I still believe it is a vital U.S. interest to find out. But the only way to find out is to create a secure environment. It is very hard for moderate, unifying, national leaders to emerge in a cauldron of violence.Maybe it is too late, but before we give up on Iraq, why not actually try to do it right? Double the American boots on the ground and redouble the diplomatic effort to bring in those Sunnis who want to be part of the process and fight to the death those who don't. As Stanford's Larry Diamond, author of an important new book on the Iraq war, ''Squandered Victory,'' puts it, we need ''a bold mobilizing strategy'' right now. That means the new Iraqi government, the U.S. and the U.N. teaming up to widen the political arena in Iraq, energizing the constitution-writing process and developing a communications-diplomatic strategy that puts our bloodthirsty enemies on the defensive rather than us. The Bush team has been weak in all these areas. For weeks now, we haven't even had ambassadors in Iraq, Afghanistan or Jordan.We've already paid a huge price for the Rumsfeld Doctrine -- ''Just enough troops to lose.'' Calling for more troops now, I know, is the last thing anyone wants to hear. But we are fooling ourselves to think that a decent, normal, forward-looking Iraqi politics or army is going to emerge from a totally insecure environment, where you can feel safe only with your own tribe.Op-Ed ColumnistSo I have a question: If I am rooting for General Motors to go bankrupt and be bought out by Toyota, does that make me a bad person?It is not that I want any autoworker to lose his or her job, but I certainly would not put on a black tie if the entire management team at G.M. got sacked and was replaced by executives from Toyota. Indeed, I think the only hope for G.M.'s autoworkers, and maybe even our country, is with Toyota. Because let's face it, as Toyota goes, so goes America.Having Toyota take over General Motors -- which based its business strategy on building gas-guzzling cars, including the idiot Hummer, scoffing at hybrid technology and fighting Congressional efforts to impose higher mileage standards on U.S. automakers -- would not only be in America's economic interest, it would also be in America's geopolitical interest.Because Toyota has pioneered the very hybrid engine technology that can help rescue not only our economy from its oil addiction (how about 500 miles per gallon of gasoline?), but also our foreign policy from dependence on Middle Eastern oil autocrats.Diffusing Toyota's hybrid technology is one of the keys to what I call ''geo-green.'' Geo-greens seek to combine into a single political movement environmentalists who want to reduce fossil fuels that cause climate change, evangelicals who want to protect God's green earth and all his creations, and geo-strategists who want to reduce our dependence on crude oil because it fuels some of the worst regimes in the world.The Bush team has been M.I.A. on energy since 9/11. Indeed, the utter indifference of the Bush team to developing a geo-green strategy -- which would also strengthen the dollar, reduce our trade deficit, make America the world leader in combating climate change and stimulate U.S. companies to take the lead in producing the green technologies that the world will desperately need as China and India industrialize -- is so irresponsible that it takes your breath away. This is especially true when you realize that the solutions to our problems are already here.As Gal Luft, co-chairman of the Set America Free coalition, a bipartisan alliance of national security, labor, environmental and religious groups that believe reducing oil consumption is a national priority, points out: the majority of U.S. oil imports go to fueling the transport sector -- primarily cars and trucks. Therefore, the key to reducing our dependence on foreign oil is powering our cars and trucks with less petroleum.There are two ways we can do that. One is electricity. We don't import electricity. We generate all of our needs with coal, hydropower, nuclear power and natural gas. Toyota's hybrid cars, like the Prius, run on both gasoline and electricity that is generated by braking and then stored in a small battery. But, says Luft, if you had a hybrid that you could plug in at night, the battery could store up 20 miles of driving per day. So your first 20 miles would be covered by the battery. The gasoline would only kick in after that. Since 50 percent of Americans do not drive more than 20 miles a day, the battery power would cover all their driving. Even if they drove more than that, combining the battery power and the gasoline could give them 100 miles per gallon of gasoline used, Luft notes.Right now Toyota does not sell plug-in hybrids. Some enthusiasts, though, are using kits to convert their hybrids to plug-ins, but that adds several thousand dollars -- and you lose your Toyota warranty. Imagine, though, if the government encouraged, through tax policy and other incentives, every automaker to offer plug-in hybrids? We would quickly move down the innovation curve and end up with better and cheaper plug-ins for all.Then add to that flexible-fuel cars, which have a special chip and fuel line that enable them to burn alcohol (ethanol or methanol), gasoline or any mixture of the two. Some four million U.S. cars already come equipped this way, including from G.M. It costs only about $100 a car to make it flex-fuel ready. Brazil hopes to have all its new cars flex-fuel ready by 2008. As Luft notes, if you combined a plug-in hybrid system with a flex-fuel system that burns 80 percent alcohol and 20 percent gasoline, you could end up stretching each gallon of gasoline up to 500 miles.In short, we don't need to reinvent the wheel or wait for sci-fi hydrogen fuel cells. The technologies we need for a stronger, more energy independent America are already here. The only thing we have a shortage of now are leaders with the imagination and will to move the country onto a geo-green path.Op-Ed ColumnistGeorge Bush has a Dick Cheney problem.It's not the one you think: an overbearing, archconservative vice president imposing his will and ideas on a less-seasoned president.No, George Bush has a different V.P. problem. It is the fact that his vice president has made clear that he is not running for president after Mr. Bush's term expires in 2008. So Mr. Bush has no heir apparent. And that explains, in part, why his second term is drifting aimlessly, disconnected from the problems facing the country.''If President Bush had a vice president, or someone who was clearly designated as heir apparent to his administration, [the president] would have a more immediate incentive to widen his political base, to offer policies that would appeal more to the center,'' argued Don Baer, a former senior adviser to President Clinton. But if one looks at the sorts of policies that Mr. Bush has chosen, or not chosen, for his second term, it suggests that Mr. Bush ''is not thinking of the bigger implications'' for three years down the road, Mr. Baer added.For instance, the spending and tax cutting by the Bush team is ridiculously out of control. It will be a miracle if there is no market-induced implosion in the economy or the housing market in the next three years. But you can bet the farm there will have to be a huge correction after 2008 to get taxes and spending back in line. If Mr. Bush had a V.P. who was clearly anointed to succeed him, and whose success would be viewed as part of Mr. Bush's own legacy, it is hard to believe the president wouldn't be interested in a more sane fiscal policy. One thing for sure, his vice president would be.Instead, Mr. Bush seems to be governing as though he were on a permanent campaign -- much like Bill Clinton did. But Bill Clinton was on a permanent presidential campaign. Mr. Bush seems to be governing as if he were on a permanent primary campaign against John McCain in South Carolina.So far, the second Bush term, to the extent that it has any discernible agenda, seems to be to cater to the far-right wing of his party -- period. It's been urgent midnight meetings about Terri Schiavo and barely a daylight session about energy.With gasoline prices soaring, and the biggest beneficiaries being the very Arab dictatorships who are tacitly sponsoring the terrorists killing Americans in Iraq, it is blindingly obvious that our country needs a comprehensive strategy for reducing our energy consumption and developing alternative fuel systems. The president has utterly failed in this regard.To travel around America today is to find a country also deeply concerned about education, competition, health care and pensions. It is a country worried about how its kids are going to find jobs, retire and take care of elderly parents. But instead of focusing on a new New Deal to address the insecurities of the age of globalization, the president set off on his second term to take apart the old New Deal, trying to privatize Social Security, only feeding people's anxiety. It won't fly.Yes, Mr. Bush has laid down a bold proposal for also fixing Social Security, but by not putting that front and center, it has gotten lost behind his private accounts obsession, which is not the country's priority. A president with a V.P. running behind him never would have let that happen.Mr. Bush would also not be taking the head-in-sand positions he has in opposition to stem cell research, climate change, population control and evolution -- positions from which centrist Republicans are now distancing themselves. Just last week, the Senate's top Republican energy-bill negotiator, Senator Pete Domenici, split from Mr. Bush and indicated that he believes the science is clear -- climate change is occurring -- and we need to do something about it.If Mr. Bush's hope is to make the Republican Party into a permanent majority party and sustain his legacy, he would have picked a handful of significant proposals to widen the party's circle -- especially with the Democrats so clearly out of ideas. But instead of widening and broadening, by focusing on getting things accomplished that would benefit the vast middle of the country, Mr. Bush is catering to right-wing fetishes.If this is how he intends to use his political capital, that's his business. But if Mr. Bush had a vice president with an eye on 2008, I have to believe he or she would be saying to the president right now: ''Hey boss. What are you doing? Where are you going? How am I going to get elected running on this dog's breakfast of antiscience, head-in-the-sand policies?''Op-Ed ColumnistAh, those French. How silly can they be? The European Union wants to consolidate its integration and France, trying to protect its own 35-hour workweek and other welfare benefits, rejects the E.U. constitution. What a bunch of antiglobalist Gaullist Luddites! Yo, Jacques, what world do you think you're livin' in, pal? Get with the program! It's called Anglo-American capitalism, mon ami.Lordy, it is fun poking fun at France. But wait ... wait ... what is that noise I hear coming from the U.S. Congress? Is that ... is that members of the U.S. Congress -- many of them Democrats -- threatening to reject Cafta, the Central American Free Trade Agreement? Is that members of the U.S. Congress afraid to endorse a free-trade agreement, signed over a year ago, with El Salvador, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic? Mon Dieu! I am afraid it is. And for many of the same reasons France has resisted more integration: a protectionist fear of competition in a world without walls.Yes, we are all Frenchmen now.Well, not quite. But that is where we are heading in the U.S. if we let the combination of the sugar lobby, which wants to block more imports from Central America; the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which doesn't like any free trade agreements; and Democrats who just want to defeat Cafta so they can make President Bush a lame duck have their way and block Cafta ratification. I understand Democrats want to stick it to Mr. Bush, but could they please defeat him on a policy he is wrong about (there are plenty) and not on expanding free trade in this hemisphere, which he is right about.The French economic instinct is not one we want to start emulating now, just as the global playing field is being flattened, bringing in more competitors from Poland to China to India. This is a time to play to our strengths of openness, flexibility and willingness to embrace creative destruction, and lead on free trade.The McKinsey Global Institute just published a study of how both Germany and France have suffered, compared with the U.S., by trying to put up walls against outsourcing and offshoring. It noted: ''A new competitive dynamic is emerging: early movers in offshoring improve their cost position and boost their market share, creating new jobs in the process. Companies who resist the trend will see increasingly unfavorable cost positions that erode market share and eventually end in job destruction. This is why adopting protectionist policies to stop companies from offshoring would be a mistake. Offshoring is a powerful way for companies to reduce their costs and improve the quality and kinds of products they offer consumers, allowing them to invest in the next generation of technology and create the jobs of tomorrow.''Cafta is critical for enabling U.S. and Central American textile firms to compete with China. U.S. firms specialize in the more sophisticated work of making dyes, designing patterns and manufacturing specialized yarns, threads and fabrics, and the Cafta countries specialize in thelabor-intensive sewing. Because the Cafta countries are right next door, U.S. retailers can respond quickly to changes in the marketplace, which far-off Chinese factories cannot do as easily. That's also why, explains Deputy Secretary of State Robert Zoellick, that a shirt that says ''Made in Honduras'' might contain 60 percent U.S. content, while a similar shirt that says ''Made in China'' most likely would have none.Finally, there is geopolitics. In the 1980's, we were worried Central America was going to go communist. Now we are worried it is going to go capitalist? We spent billions fighting communism there. Now we have a chance to help consolidate these fragile democracies by locking in a trading relationship with the U.S. that is critical for their development. Shame on us if we balk.But President Bush needs to spend some political capital and sell this deal in these terms. ''The administration has to get out and connect the dots for people,'' said Richard Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations and author of a thoughtful new book on foreign policy, ''The Opportunity: America's Moment to Alter History's Course.'' ''Otherwise the vocal minority will trump the interests of the majority. We should not assume that this backlash [against free trade] that is going around is just a French malaise or Dutch elm disease. It could happen here.'' But if we think we can indulge protectionism and not worry about the geopolitical spillovers in our own backyard, that is a real illusion. ''The world is not Las Vegas,'' added Mr. Haass. ''What happens there will not stay there.''Op-Ed ColumnistHere's something you probably didn't know: Ireland today is the richest country in the European Union after Luxembourg.Yes, the country that for hundreds of years was best known for emigration, tragic poets, famines, civil wars and leprechauns today has a per capita G.D.P. higher than that of Germany, France and Britain. How Ireland went from the sick man of Europe to the rich man in less than a generation is an amazing story. It tells you a lot about Europe today: all the innovation is happening on the periphery by those countries embracing globalization in their own ways -- Ireland, Britain, Scandinavia and Eastern Europe -- while those following the French-German social model are suffering high unemployment and low growth.Ireland's turnaround began in the late 1960's when the government made secondary education free, enabling a lot more working-class kids to get a high school or technical degree. As a result, when Ireland joined the E.U. in 1973, it was able to draw on a much more educated work force.By the mid-1980's, though, Ireland had reaped the initial benefits of E.U. membership -- subsidies to build better infrastructure and a big market to sell into. But it still did not have enough competitive products to sell, because of years of protectionism and fiscal mismanagement. The country was going broke, and most college grads were emigrating.''We went on a borrowing, spending and taxing spree, and that nearly drove us under,'' said Deputy Prime Minister Mary Harney. ''It was because we nearly went under that we got the courage to change.''And change Ireland did. In a quite unusual development, the government, the main trade unions, farmers and industrialists came together and agreed on a program of fiscal austerity, slashing corporate taxes to 12.5 percent, far below the rest of Europe, moderating wages and prices, and aggressively courting foreign investment. In 1996, Ireland made college education basically free, creating an even more educated work force.The results have been phenomenal. Today, 9 out of 10 of the world's top pharmaceutical companies have operations here, as do 16 of the top 20 medical device companies and 7 out of the top 10 software designers. Last year, Ireland got more foreign direct investment from America than from China. And overall government tax receipts are way up.''We set up in Ireland in 1990,'' Michael Dell, founder of Dell Computer, explained to me via e-mail. ''What attracted us? [A] well-educated work force -- and good universities close by. [Also,] Ireland has an industrial and tax policy which is consistently very supportive of businesses, independent of which political party is in power. I believe this is because there are enough people who remember the very bad times to de-politicize economic development. [Ireland also has] very good transportation and logistics and a good location -- easy to move products to major markets in Europe quickly.''Finally, added Mr. Dell, ''they're competitive, want to succeed, hungry and know how to win. Our factory is in Limerick, but we also have several thousand sales and technical people outside of Dublin. The talent in Ireland has proven to be a wonderful resource for us. Fun fact: We are Ireland's largest exporter.''Intel opened its first chip factory in Ireland in 1993. James Jarrett, an Intel vice president, said Intel was attracted by Ireland's large pool of young educated men and women, low corporate taxes and other incentives that saved Intel roughly a billion dollars over 10 years. National health care didn't hurt, either. ''We have 4,700 employees there now in four factories, and we are even doing some high-end chip designing in Shannon with Irish engineers,'' he said.In 1990, Ireland's total work force was 1.1 million. This year it will hit two million, with no unemployment and 200,000 foreign workers (including 50,000 Chinese). Others are taking notes. Prime Minister Bertie Ahern said: ''I've met the premier of China five times in the last two years.''Ireland's advice is very simple: Make high school and college education free; make your corporate taxes low, simple and transparent; actively seek out global companies; open your economy to competition; speak English; keep your fiscal house in order; and build a consensus around the whole package with labor and management -- then hang in there, because there will be bumps in the road -- and you, too, can become one of the richest countries in Europe.''It wasn't a miracle, we didn't find gold,'' said Mary Harney. ''It was the right domestic policies and embracing globalization.''Op-Ed ColumnistThere is a huge debate roiling in Europe today over which economic model to follow: the Franco-German shorter-workweek-six-weeks'-vacation-never-fire-anyone-but-high-unemployment social model or the less protected but more innovative, high-employment Anglo-Saxon model preferred by Britain, Ireland and Eastern Europe. It is obvious to me that the Irish-British model is the way of the future, and the only question is when Germany and France will face reality: either they become Ireland or they become museums. That is their real choice over the next few years -- it's either the leprechaun way or the Louvre.Because I am convinced of that, I am also convinced that the German and French political systems will experience real shocks in the coming years as both nations are asked to work harder and embrace either more outsourcing or more young Muslim and Eastern European immigrants to remain competitive.As an Irish public relations executive in Dublin remarked to me: ''How would you like to be the French leader who tells the French people they have to follow Ireland?'' Or even worse, Tony Blair!Just how ugly things could get was demonstrated the other day when Mr. Blair told his E.U. colleagues at the European Parliament that they had to modernize or perish.''Pro-Chirac French [parliamentarians] skulked at the back of the hall,'' The Times of London reported. But Jean Quatremer, the veteran Brussels correspondent for the French left-wing newspaper Libération, was quoted by The Times as saying: ''For a long time we have been talking about the French social model, as opposed to the horrible Anglo-Saxon model, but we now see that it is our model that is a horror.''Given that Ireland received more foreign direct investment from the U.S. in 2003 than China received from the U.S., the Germans and French may want to take a few tips from the Celtic Tiger. One of the first reforms Ireland instituted was to make it easier to fire people, without having to pay years of severance. Sounds brutal, I know. But the easier it is to fire people, the more willing companies are to hire people.Harry Kraemer Jr., the former C.E.O. of Baxter International, a medical equipment maker that has made several investments in Ireland, explained that ''the energy level, the work ethic, the tax optimization and the flexibility of the labor supply'' all made Ireland infinitely more attractive to invest in than France or Germany, where it was enormously costly to let go even one worker. The Irish, he added, had the self-confidence that if they kept their labor laws flexible some jobs would go, but new jobs would keep coming -- and that is exactly what has happened.Ireland is ''playing offense,'' Mr. Kraemer said, while Germany and France are ''playing defense,'' and the more they try to protect every old job, the fewer new ones they attract.But Ireland has started to play offense in a lot of other ways as well. It initially focused on attracting investments from U.S. high-tech companies by offering them a flexible, educated work force and low corporate taxes. But now, explained Ireland's minister of education, Mary Hanafin, the country has started a campaign to double the number of Ph.D.'s it graduates in science and engineering by 2010, and it has set up various funds to get global companies, and just brainy people, to come to Ireland to do research. Ireland is now actively recruiting Chinese scientists in particular.''It is good for our own quality students to be mixing with quality students from abroad,'' Ms. Hanafin said. ''Industry will go where the major research goes.''The goal, added the minister for enterprise and trade, Micheal Martin, is to generate more homegrown Irish companies and not just work for others. His ministry recently set up an Enterprise Ireland fund to identify ''high-potential Irish start-up companies and give them mentoring and support,'' and to also nurture mid-size Irish companies into multinationals.And by the way, because of all the tax revenue and employment the global companies are generating in Ireland, Dublin has been able to increase spending on health care, schools and infrastructure. ''You can only do this if you have the income to do it,'' Deputy Prime Minister Mary Harney said. ''You can't have social inclusion without economic success. ... This is how you create the real social Europe.''Germany and France are trying to protect their welfare capitalism with defense. Ireland is generating its own sustainable model of social capitalism by playing offense. I'll bet on the offense.Op-Ed ColumnistI was having coffee at a Gaza hotel on Saturday with a group of Palestinian and Egyptian businessmen when one of the Palestinians, half-serious, half-joking, gave me a stock tip: ''Nablus.'' The Palestine Securities Exchange, located in the West Bank town of Nablus, has skyrocketed since the Israeli-Palestinian cease-fire went into effect in February. And check out Paltel, the Palestinian phone company. It's almost as hot as Google. You don't have a broker in Nablus? Sounds a little risky? No problem. Check out the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange. It's also soared since the cease-fire and Israel's decision to withdraw from Gaza.The simultaneous boomlets in the Israeli and Palestinian stock markets highlight one of the most important political facts I encountered traveling in Israel, Gaza and the West Bank: a groundswell of relief that both sides have found a way, even temporarily, to stop the insane cycle of Palestinian suicide bombing and Israeli retaliations that totally distorted daily life here. Quite simply, Israelis and Palestinians are really enjoying this calm after four years of mutually assured destruction. Palestinian restaurants in Ramallah are full again. Hotel owners in Gaza are repainting their lobbies. Israel is again awash in tourists.No leader or party can ignore how much people want this calm to hold -- even Hamas. As Ghazi Hamad, editor of the Hamas newspaper Al Risalat, said to me, ''One reason Hamas agreed to the cease-fire was to give people a chance to breathe and rest.''The other hugely important fact is that Israel is going to begin withdrawing from the Gaza Strip in mid-August. In a courageous move to shrink Israeli control of Palestinians, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon is risking his life, and defying all the schemers and backstabbers in his party trying to topple him, to unilaterally uproot the Jewish settlers in Gaza.This pending withdrawal and the eruption of a pent-up desire for normalcy among both Israelis and Palestinians together form the foundation for rebuilding the crumbled peace process. That's the good news. The bad news is that although this Israeli withdrawal is unilateral, for it to provide the peace and prosperity that both sides want from it requires a series of complicated agreements about how Gaza will relate to Israel and the rest of the world. Many key details are still not fully baked -- at all.Just a few of the unresolved issues are: Who will control the border area between Gaza and Egypt to prevent arms, terrorists and illicit goods from coming in? What will be Gaza's legal status? Will the U.N. confirm the Israeli withdrawal from Gaza, as it did from Lebanon, creating an internationally recognized border that will also constitute what a Haaretz essayist, Ari Shavit, calls ''an invisible wall of international legitimacy''? (Even terrorists today are deterred by the legality of the Israel-Lebanon border.) Who will control the customs and security at Gaza's airport and seaport? How will trucks carrying goods from Gaza to Israel be inspected? Where do we go next?The answer to these questions will determine whether Gaza will be really open to the world, and that will determine whether it is a platform for a real Palestinian state or a big prison.One reason these issues have not been resolved is because Mr. Sharon has not resolved them in his own mind. He had the instinct to withdraw. It is a good one. But it is unclear where he wants to go with it.Crucial details are also uncooked because Mahmoud Abbas, the Palestinian president, while firm in his resolve to end the violence, has been very weak so far. He has not confronted the corrupt and feckless old guard that Yasir Arafat left behind. He has not brought in the young generation. And he has not put his security forces in order. I spent a day in Gaza and did not see one Palestinian policeman, but I saw green Hamas flags everywhere.Finally, if this Gaza withdrawal is going to happen in a way that lays the foundation for a wider settlement, which it can, it will in the end require a U.S. broker, guarantor and arm-twister -- at the highest level.So far, Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice has just breezed in and out. Bad call. Not only will she not escape failure, but she is also missing how emotionally important and helpful a high-level U.S. embrace of the Israeli majority's desire to get out of Gaza would be right now. Also, helping to knit together all the unresolved issues would not only bring off the withdrawal in the right way, but would also bolster America's standing in this region at a key time.God created American secretaries of state for this kind of moment.Op-Ed ColumnistYesterday's bombings in downtown London are profoundly disturbing. In part, that is because a bombing in our mother country and closest ally, England, is almost like a bombing in our own country. In part, it's because one assault may have involved a suicide bomber, bringing this terrible jihadist weapon into the heart of a major Western capital. That would be deeply troubling because open societies depend on trust -- on trusting that the person sitting next to you on the bus or subway is not wearing dynamite.The attacks are also deeply disturbing because when jihadist bombers take their madness into the heart of our open societies, our societies are never again quite as open. Indeed, we all just lost a little freedom yesterday.But maybe the most important aspect of the London bombings is this: When jihadist-style bombings happen in Riyadh, that is a Muslim-Muslim problem. That is a police problem for Saudi Arabia. But when Al-Qaeda-like bombings come to the London Underground, that becomes a civilizational problem. Every Muslim living in a Western society suddenly becomes a suspect, becomes a potential walking bomb. And when that happens, it means Western countries are going to be tempted to crack down even harder on their own Muslim populations.That, too, is deeply troubling. The more Western societies -- particularly the big European societies, which have much larger Muslim populations than America -- look on their own Muslims with suspicion, the more internal tensions this creates, and the more alienated their already alienated Muslim youth become. This is exactly what Osama bin Laden dreamed of with 9/11: to create a great gulf between the Muslim world and the globalizing West.So this is a critical moment. We must do all we can to limit the civilizational fallout from this bombing. But this is not going to be easy. Why? Because unlike after 9/11, there is no obvious, easy target to retaliate against for bombings like those in London. There are no obvious terrorist headquarters and training camps in Afghanistan that we can hit with cruise missiles. The Al Qaeda threat has metastasized and become franchised. It is no longer vertical, something that we can punch in the face. It is now horizontal, flat and widely distributed, operating through the Internet and tiny cells.Because there is no obvious target to retaliate against, and because there are not enough police to police every opening in an open society, either the Muslim world begins to really restrain, inhibit and denounce its own extremists -- if it turns out that they are behind the London bombings -- or the West is going to do it for them. And the West will do it in a rough, crude way -- by simply shutting them out, denying them visas and making every Muslim in its midst guilty until proven innocent.And because I think that would be a disaster, it is essential that the Muslim world wake up to the fact that it has a jihadist death cult in its midst. If it does not fight that death cult, that cancer, within its own body politic, it is going to infect Muslim-Western relations everywhere. Only the Muslim world can root out that death cult. It takes a village.What do I mean? I mean that the greatest restraint on human behavior is never a policeman or a border guard. The greatest restraint on human behavior is what a culture and a religion deem shameful. It is what the village and its religious and political elders say is wrong or not allowed. Many people said Palestinian suicide bombing was the spontaneous reaction of frustrated Palestinian youth. But when Palestinians decided that it was in their interest to have a cease-fire with Israel, those bombings stopped cold. The village said enough was enough.The Muslim village has been derelict in condemning the madness of jihadist attacks. When Salman Rushdie wrote a controversial novel involving the prophet Muhammad, he was sentenced to death by the leader of Iran. To this day -- to this day -- no major Muslim cleric or religious body has ever issued a fatwa condemning Osama bin Laden.Some Muslim leaders have taken up this challenge. This past week in Jordan, King Abdullah II hosted an impressive conference in Amman for moderate Muslim thinkers and clerics who want to take back their faith from those who have tried to hijack it. But this has to go further and wider.The double-decker buses of London and the subways of Paris, as well as the covered markets of Riyadh, Bali and Cairo, will never be secure as long as the Muslim village and elders do not take on, delegitimize, condemn and isolate the extremists in their midst.Op-Ed ColumnistGush Katif, the Israeli settlement bloc in the heart of the Gaza Strip, is an unusual place -- a bizarre combination of ''Fiddler on the Roof'' and Club Med, barbed wire and dune buggies, surfers and settlers, all surrounded by over one million Palestinians. In the last year, though, the resurgent Israeli center, the most important political force in the Arab-Israeli conflict today, concluded that this Jewish outpost was a bridge too far, and the Army has been ordered to uproot its settlers as part of a general withdrawal from Gaza.What is playing out in Israel today is a huge drama in which this resurgent Israeli center, having awakened to just what a danger the extremist settlers pose for Israel's future, is finally confronting them. And the settlers, like long-indulged children who are finally being spanked, are becoming unhinged. This is a dangerous time because the settlers, who do not really respect the authority of the Israeli state, will try anything.When I was in Israel two weeks ago, a group of teenage settlers, inspired by a witches' brew of Jewish fascism and messianism, took over an abandoned Arab home next to Gush Katif and scrawled on the side in Hebrew: ''Muhammad Is a Pig.'' When the Palestinians next door saw it, they began stoning the house. Some settler boys got hold of a Palestinian teenager and started pounding him with rocks, an act the Israeli Army described as an attempted ''lynching.'' The boy was saved by an Israeli soldier and a journalist who dragged him behind a wall.Why did they write ''Muhammad Is a Pig?'' The explanation starts with the reemergence of the Israeli center.The Israeli left was blown apart by Yasir Arafat's rejection of the peace deal at Camp David. The Israeli right was blown apart by the last four years of Palestinian uprisings, which made it clear that Israel could not indefinitely occupy the West Bank and Gaza without losing its Jewish majority and democratic character. The collapse of the Israeli left and right has created the New Israeli Center.The New Israeli Center wants to simply disengage from as many Palestinians as possible, keep only those Jewish settlements adjacent to Jerusalem and Tel Aviv, and wait for a new Palestinian leadership to emerge.But the New Israeli Center needed a leader who had the legitimacy and toughness to pull this off. It turned out to be Ariel Sharon, the man who led the settlement movement in the first place but who has now concluded that Israel must get rid of Gaza to retain its Jewish character.Mr. Sharon's transformation has shocked the settlers, and many have vowed to disobey.''The settlers believe that authority only resides in the Land of Israel, not the State of Israel,'' said Moshe Halbertal, a philosopher at the Hartman Institute and the Hebrew University. ''They insist that the state is not sovereign when it comes to the Land of Israel. This struggle is the Land of Israel versus the State of Israel'' -- and the state is winning.That is why those settler kids wrote ''Muhammad Is a Pig'' on that Arab home. They want to trigger a religious war between Muslims and Jews -- a war that would force all Israelis to stand with the settlers and abort the evacuation. So far, it has not worked. The Israeli Army immediately erased ''Muhammad Is a Pig,'' and later arrested the boys who led the stoning.''This Gaza withdrawal is the revolt of the Israeli majority against being taken hostage any longer by the settler minority,'' said the Israeli writer Ari Shavit. ''And that is why these settlers go berserk -- because they have gotten so used to controlling our destiny, no matter who was in power. Now, for the first time, there is a clear message: 'Enough is enough.'''In this sense, Mr. Shavit added, there is something heroic about what the Israeli center is doing: ''It is disengaging from Gaza and from a minority -- without even knowing where exactly it is going next.'' This assertion by the vital center in Israeli society is a sign of ''something really healthy,'' Mr. Shavit concluded, ''but it is a real battle,'' and the forces of moderation need ''a lot of support from the outside world.''Indeed, the struggle in Israel today is a microcosm of what needs to happen in this whole region.Mr. Sharon described the settler youths who wrote ''Muhammad Is a Pig'' as ''extremist gangs who are trying to terrorize Israeli society and tear it to pieces through violence against Jews and Arabs, and [through] offending Muslims and violating their symbols by thuggery and disobedience.''It's time the Arab-Muslim world talked to its Islamo-fascists, suicide ''martyrs'' and hate-spewing preachers the same way.Op-Ed ColumnistA few years ago I was visiting Bahrain and sitting with friends in a fish restaurant when news appeared on an overhead TV about Muslim terrorists, men and women, who had taken hostages in Russia. What struck me, though, was the instinctive reaction of the Bahraini businessman sitting next to me, who muttered under his breath, ''Why are we in every story?'' The ''we'' in question was Muslims.The answer to that question is one of the most important issues in geopolitics today: Why are young Sunni Muslim males, from London to Riyadh and Bali to Baghdad, so willing to blow up themselves and others in the name of their religion? Of course, not all Muslims are suicide bombers; it would be ludicrous to suggest that.But virtually all suicide bombers, of late, have been Sunni Muslims. There are a lot of angry people in the world. Angry Mexicans. Angry Africans. Angry Norwegians. But the only ones who seem to feel entitled and motivated to kill themselves and totally innocent people, including other Muslims, over their anger are young Sunni radicals. What is going on?Neither we nor the Muslim world can run away from this question any longer. This is especially true when it comes to people like Muhammad Bouyeri -- a Dutch citizen of Moroccan origin who last year tracked down the Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh, a critic of Islamic intolerance, on an Amsterdam street, shot him 15 times and slit his throat with a butcher knife. He told a Dutch court on the final day of his trial on Tuesday: ''I take complete responsibility for my actions. I acted purely in the name of my religion.''Clearly, several things are at work. One is that Europe is not a melting pot and has never adequately integrated its Muslim minorities, who, as The Financial Times put it, often find themselves ''cut off from their country, language and culture of origin'' without being assimilated into Europe, making them easy prey for peddlers of a new jihadist identity.Also at work is Sunni Islam's struggle with modernity. Islam has a long tradition of tolerating other religions, but only on the basis of the supremacy of Islam, not equality with Islam. Islam's self-identity is that it is the authentic and ideal expression of monotheism. Muslims are raised with the view that Islam is God 3.0, Christianity is God 2.0, Judaism is God 1.0, and Hinduism is God 0.0.Part of what seems to be going on with these young Muslim males is that they are, on the one hand, tempted by Western society, and ashamed of being tempted. On the other hand, they are humiliated by Western society because while Sunni Islamic civilization is supposed to be superior, its decision to ban the reform and reinterpretation of Islam since the 12th century has choked the spirit of innovation out of Muslim lands, and left the Islamic world less powerful, less economically developed, less technically advanced than God 2.0, 1.0 and 0.0.''Some of these young Muslim men are tempted by a civilization they consider morally inferior, and they are humiliated by the fact that, while having been taught their faith is supreme, other civilizations seem to be doing much better,'' said Raymond Stock, the Cairo-based biographer and translator of Naguib Mahfouz. ''When the inner conflict becomes too great, some are turned by recruiters to seek the sick prestige of 'martyrdom' by fighting the allegedly unjust occupation of Muslim lands and the 'decadence' in our own.''This is not about the poverty of money. This is about the poverty of dignity and the rage it can trigger.One of the London bombers was married, with a young child and another on the way. I can understand, but never accept, suicide bombing in Iraq or Israel as part of a nationalist struggle. But when a British Muslim citizen, nurtured by that society, just indiscriminately blows up his neighbors and leaves behind a baby and pregnant wife, to me he has to be in the grip of a dangerous cult or preacher -- dangerous to his faith community and to the world.How does that happen? Britain's Independent newspaper described one of the bombers, Hasib Hussain, as having recently undergone a sudden conversion ''from a British Asian who dressed in Western clothes to a religious teenager who wore Islamic garb and only stopped to say salaam to fellow Muslims.''The secret of this story is in that conversion -- and so is the crisis in Islam. The people and ideas that brought about that sudden conversion of Hasib Hussain and his pals -- if not stopped by other Muslims -- will end up converting every Muslim into a suspect and one of the world's great religions into a cult of death.Op-Ed ColumnistOn the question of whether China's Cnooc oil company should be permitted by the U.S. government to purchase the U.S. oil and gas company Unocal, my view is very simple: let the market rule. Oil is fungible. It is all one global market. And if China wants to overpay for a second-tier U.S. energy company, that's China's business. Anyway, the more starved Americans are for oil, the sooner we will adopt alternatives and get off this drug once and for all.If I seem uninterested in this matter, I am. Because I do not think the important issue is who owns Unocal. The important issue is whether America and China are drifting into a dangerous confrontation over geoeconomics. How so? Well, in brief, the Chinese and U.S. economies have become totally intertwined. While we have been focused on 9/11 and Iraq, China and America have become, in economic terms, Siamese twins.You know that cheap mortgage you just got? Well, who do you think subsidized it? In many ways it was China. Americans don't save anymore, and import more than they export. Normally, a nation that did that as long and lavishly as the U.S. has would have to raise interest rates to get other countries to hold its currency. But America has not had to do that, in part because China has been willing to hold most of the dollars it has been accumulating -- gained from all the goods it is selling America -- despite the low interest paid on those dollars and the fact that they have been depreciating against other major currencies.How come? Call it the Tiananmen-Texas Bargain. After Tiananmen, China's leaders struck an implicit bargain with their people, argued Steven Weber, director of Berkeley's Institute of International Studies. ''The bargain is that China's voters give up the right to vote, and the Chinese government guarantees China's middle class 9 percent annual economic growth. China's political stability today depends on that bargain.''The Texas side of that bargain came from the Bush team. For a long time, it ignored China's undervalued currency so China could sell us lots of cheap stuff and would continue holding our devaluing dollars and helping to keep U.S. interest rates low. Our buying binge helped keep China's workers employed and its leaders in power. Their holding our depreciating dollars helped you buy a house with no money down. We've been in symbiotic relationships like this before with Western Europe and Japan during the cold war, but they were allies and democracies, so we could adjust imbalances more easily. Not so with China.We are Siamese twins, but most unlikely ones -- joined at the hip, but not identical. That's a problem. Because we now need to adjust the Tiananmen-Texas bargain. So many U.S. dollars and jobs are flowing to China, it is becoming politically and economically unsustainable for the Bush team. Hedge funds have made huge speculative bets around the T-T bargain. We need China to revalue its currency upward against the dollar, so China buys more stuff from us and we buy less stuff from China.But China's foreign exchange reserves today are nearly $750 billion and heading for $1 trillion -- most in U.S. Treasury notes. If China is compelled by the U.S. to revalue its currency, and effectively devalue the dollar further, Beijing will take a big hit on all of its dollar reserves -- especially since most experts say the dollar has to be devalued by 30 to 40 percent against the Chinese currency to have any impact on the trade balance. That would also be likely to affect the dollar's value against other currencies and create pressure for inflation and higher interest rates in the U.S.''If the dollar falls and U.S. interest rates rise, it could cause a recession or stagflation in America,'' Professor Weber said. ''But if the Chinese currency rises too far too fast and triggers unemployment, it could cause a revolution against the Communist Party. We might see our dollar policy as a market adjustment, but they could see it as an attempt at regime change.''As I said, the issue is not Unocal. The real issue is that we have slipped into a symbiotic relationship with another major power that is neither a free market nor a democracy. We have both grown dependent on that relationship -- the U.S. for cheap goods and cheap mortgages, and China for high employment and regime stability. We now have to adjust the bargain at the heart of that relationship. Whether we can do that delicately, without destabilizing Beijing or the global economy, could be the big geopolitical story of 2005.Op-Ed ColumnistI wasn't surprised to read that British police officers in white protective suits and blue gloves were combing through the Iqra Learning Center bookstore in Leeds for clues to the 7/7 London bombings. Some of the 7/7 bombers hung out at the bookstore. And I won't be surprised if today's bombers also sampled the literature there.Iqra not only sold hatemongering Islamist literature, but, according to The Wall Street Journal, was ''the sole distributor of Islamgames, a U.S.-based company that makes video games. The video games feature apocalyptic battles between defenders of Islam and opponents. One game, Ummah Defense I, has the world 'finally united under the Banner of Islam' in 2114, until a revolt by disbelievers. The player's goal is to seek out and destroy the disbelievers.''Guess what: words matter. Bookstores matter. Video games matter. But here is our challenge: If the primary terrorism problem we face today can effectively be addressed only by a war of ideas within Islam -- a war between life-affirming Muslims against those who want to turn one of the world's great religions into a death cult -- what can the rest of us do?More than just put up walls. We need to shine a spotlight on hate speech wherever it appears. The State Department produces an annual human rights report. Henceforth, it should also produce a quarterly War of Ideas Report, which would focus on those religious leaders and writers who are inciting violence against others.I would compile it in a nondiscriminatory way. I want the names of the Jewish settler extremists who wrote ''Muhammad Is a Pig'' on buildings in Gaza right up there with Sheik Abd Al-Rahman Al-Sudayyis, a Saudi who is imam of Islam's holy mosque in Mecca. According to the Memri translation service, the imam was barred from Canada following ''a report about his sermons by Memri that included Al-Sudayyis calling Jews 'the scum of the earth' and 'monkeys and pigs' who should be 'annihilated.' Other enemies of Islam were referred to by Sheik Al-Sudayyis as 'worshipers of the cross' and 'idol-worshiping Hindus' who must be fought.''Sunlight is more important than you think. Those who spread hate do not like to be exposed, noted Yigal Carmon, the founder of Memri, which monitors the Arab-Muslim media. The hate spreaders assume that they are talking only to their own, in their own language, and can get away with murder. When their words are spotlighted, they often feel pressure to retract, defend or explain them.''Whenever they are exposed, they react the next day,'' Mr. Carmon said. ''No one wants to be exposed in the West as a preacher of hate.''We also need to spotlight the ''excuse makers,'' the former State Department spokesman James Rubin said. After every major terrorist incident, the excuse makers come out to tell us why imperialism, Zionism, colonialism or Iraq explains why the terrorists acted. These excuse makers are just one notch less despicable than the terrorists and also deserve to be exposed. When you live in an open society like London, where anyone with a grievance can publish an article, run for office or start a political movement, the notion that blowing up a busload of innocent civilians in response to Iraq is somehow ''understandable'' is outrageous. ''It erases the distinction between legitimate dissent and terrorism,'' Mr. Rubin said, ''and an open society needs to maintain a clear wall between them.''There is no political justification for 9/11, 7/7 or 7/21. As the Middle East expert Stephen P. Cohen put it: ''These terrorists are what they do.'' And what they do is murder.Finally, we also need to shine a bright light on the ''truth tellers.'' Every week some courageous Arab or Muslim intellectual, cleric or columnist publishes an essay in his or her media calling on fellow Muslims to deal with the cancer in their midst. The truth tellers' words also need to be disseminated globally. ''The rulers in these countries have no interest in amplifying the voices of moderates because the moderates often disagree with the rulers as much as they disagree with the extremists,'' said Husain Haqqani, author of the new book ''Pakistan: Between Mosque and Military.'' ''You have to deal us moderates into the game by helping to amplify our voices and exposing the extremists and their amen corner.''Every quarter, the State Department should identify the Top10 hatemongers, excuse makers and truth tellers in the world. It wouldn't be a cure-all. But it would be a message to the extremists: you are free to say what you want, but we are free to listen, to let the whole world know what you are saying and to protect every free society from hate spreaders like you. Words matter.Op-Ed ColumnistThere is no doubt that Lance Armstrong's seventh straight victory in the Tour de France, which has prompted sportswriters to rename the whole race the Tour de Lance, makes him one of the greatest U.S. athletes of all time. What I find most impressive about Armstrong, besides his sheer willpower to triumph over cancer, is the strategic focus he brings to his work, from his prerace training regimen to the meticulous way he and his cycling team plot out every leg of the race. It is a sight to behold. I have been thinking about them lately because their abilities to meld strength and strategy -- to thoughtfully plan ahead and to sacrifice today for a big gain tomorrow -- seem to be such fading virtues in American life.Sadly, those are the virtues we now associate with China, Chinese athletes and Chinese leaders. Talk to U.S. business executives and they'll often comment on how many of China's leaders are engineers, people who can talk to you about numbers, long-term problem-solving and the national interest -- not a bunch of lawyers looking for a sound bite to get through the evening news. America's most serious deficit today is a deficit of such leaders in politics and business.John Mack, the new C.E.O. at Morgan Stanley, initially demanded in the contract he signed June 30 that his total pay for the next two years would be no less than the average pay package received by the C.E.O.'s at Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, Lehman Brothers and Bear Stearns. If that average turned out to be more than $25 million, Mr. Mack was to be paid at least that much. He eventually backed off that demand after a howl of protest, but it struck me as the epitome of what is wrong in America today.We are now playing defense. A top C.E.O. wants to be paid not based on his performance, but based on the average of his four main rivals! That is like Lance Armstrong's saying he will race only if he is guaranteed to come in first or second, no matter what his cycling times are on each leg.I recently spent time in Ireland, which has quietly become the second-richest country in the E.U., first by going through some severe belt-tightening that meant everyone had to sacrifice, then by following that with a plan to upgrade the education of its entire work force, and a strategy to recruit and induce as many global high-tech companies and researchers as possible to locate in Ireland. The Irish have a plan. They are focused. They have mobilized business, labor and government around a common agenda. They are playing offense.Wouldn't you think that if you were president, after you'd read the umpteenth story about premier U.S. companies, like Intel and Apple, building their newest factories, and even research facilities, in China, India or Ireland, that you'd summon the top U.S. business leaders to Washington to ask them just one question: ''What do we have to do so you will keep your best jobs here? Make me a list and I will not rest until I get it enacted.''And if you were president, and you had just seen more suicide bombs in London, wouldn't you say to your aides: ''We have got to reduce our dependence on Middle East oil. We have to do it for our national security. We have to do it because only if we bring down the price of crude will these countries be forced to reform. And we should want to do it because it is clear that green energy solutions are the wave of the future, and the more quickly we impose a stringent green agenda on ourselves, the more our companies will lead innovation in these technologies.''Instead, we are about to pass an energy bill that, while it does contain some good provisions, will make no real dent in our gasoline consumption, largely because no one wants to demand that Detroit build cars that get much better mileage. We are just feeding Detroit the rope to hang itself. It's assisted suicide. I thought people went to jail for that?And if you were president, would you really say to the nation, in the face of the chaos in Iraq, that ''if our commanders on the ground say we need more troops, I will send them,'' but that they had not asked? It is not what the generals are asking you, Mr. President -- it is what you are asking them, namely: ''What do you need to win?'' Because it is clear we are not winning, and we are not winning because we have never made Iraq a secure place where normal politics could emerge.Oh, well, maybe we have the leaders we deserve. Maybe we just want to admire Lance Armstrong, but not be Lance Armstrong. Too much work. Maybe that's the wristband we should be wearing: Live wrong. Party on. Pay later.Op-Ed Columnist Maureen Dowd is on leave until Aug. 10.In visiting Gaza and Israel a few weeks ago, I realized how much the huge drama in Iraq has obscured some of the slower, deeper but equally significant changes happening around the Middle East. To put it bluntly, the political parties in the Arab world and Israel that have shaped the politics of this region since 1967 have all either crumbled or been gutted of any of their original meaning. The only major parties with any internal energy and coherence left today are Hamas, Hezbollah and the Muslim Brotherhood, and they are scared out of their minds -- scared that if all the secular parties collapse, they may have to rule, and they don't have the answers for jobs, sewers and electricity.In short, Iraq is not the only country in this neighborhood struggling to write a new social contract and develop new parties. The same thing is going on in Lebanon, Israel, Egypt, Syria, Jordan and Gaza. If you like comparative politics, you may want to pull up a chair and pop some popcorn, because this sort of political sound and light show comes along only every 30 or 40 years.How did it all happen? The peace process and the large-scale immigration of Jews to Israel (aliyah) were the energy sources that animated the Israeli Labor Party, and their recent collapse has sapped its strength. Meanwhile, Ariel Sharon's decision to pull out of Gaza unilaterally and uproot all the Jewish settlements there, settlements that his Likud Party had extolled as part of its core mission, has fractured that party.Likud's vision of creating a Greater Israel ''collapsed because of Palestinian demography and terrorism, and Labor's vision of peace collapsed with the failure at Camp David,'' said the former Likud minister Dan Meridor.The death of Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian intifada -- which was as much a revolt by Palestinian youth against Fatah's corrupt old guard as against Israel -- and Israel's crushing response have broken Fatah and its animating vision of ''revolution until victory over the Zionist entity.''''Fatah never made the transition from a national liberation movement to civil society,'' said the Palestinian reformist legislator Ziad Abu Amr. Iraq's Baath Party was smashed to bits by President Bush. Syria's Baath -- because of the loss of both its charismatic leader, Hafez al-Assad, and Lebanon, its vassal and launching pad for war on Israel -- has no juice anymore. Lebanon's Christian Phalange Party and Amal Party, and the other ethnic parties there, are all casting about for new identities, now that their primary obsessions -- the Syrian and Israeli bogymen -- have both left Lebanon. Egypt's National Democratic Party, which should be spearheading the modernization of the Arab world, can't get any traction because Egyptians still view it as the extension of a nondemocratic regime.Intensifying these pressures is the big change from Washington, said the Palestinian political scientist Khalil Shikaki: ''As long as Washington was happy with regimes that offered only stability, there was no outside pressure for change. Now that the Bush administration has taken a bolder position, the public's expectations with regard to democratization are becoming greater. But the existing parties were not built to deliver that. So unless new ones emerge, either Hamas or anarchy could fill the vacuum.''The big challenge for all these societies is obvious: Can they reconstitute these old parties or build new ones that can make the task and narrative of developing their own countries -- making their people competitive in an age when China and India and Ireland are eating their lunch -- as emotionally gripping as fighting Israel or the West or settling the West Bank?Can there be a Baath Party or a Fatah that has real views on competition, science and the environment? Will Labor and Likud (which, though badly hobbled, are still more like real political parties than those in the Arab world) ever have a defining debate over why nearly one in five Israelis live below the poverty line?''For decades, people in the region were only interested in political parties that offered national liberation,'' remarked Jordan's deputy prime minister, Marwan Muashar, whose country is in the midst of a huge overhaul. ''But now all the existential threats to the different states are gone. Now the focus has shifted from national liberation to personal liberation, but in all spheres: more equality, less corruption, better incomes, better schools.  Governments are talking differently, but up to now people are still skeptical. They have heard so much talk.  The first country or party that really shows results will have a big effect on the whole region because everyone is looking for a new vision.''Op-Ed ColumnistI've been thinking of running for high office on a one-issue platform: I promise, if elected, that within four years America will have cellphone service as good as Ghana's. If re-elected, I promise that in eight years America will have cellphone service as good as Japan's, provided Japan agrees not to forge ahead on wireless technology. My campaign bumper sticker: ''Can You Hear Me Now?''I began thinking about this after watching the Japanese use cellphones and laptops to get on the Internet from speeding bullet trains and subways deep underground. But the last straw was when I couldn't get cellphone service while visiting I.B.M.'s headquarters in Armonk, N.Y.But don't worry -- Congress is on the case. It dropped everything last week to pass a bill to protect gun makers from shooting victims' lawsuits. The fact that the U.S. has fallen to 16th in the world in broadband connectivity aroused no interest. Look, I don't even like cellphones, but this is not about gadgets. The world is moving to an Internet-based platform for commerce, education, innovation and entertainment. Wealth and productivity will go to those countries or companies that get more of their innovators, educators, students, workers and suppliers connected to this platform via computers, phones and P.D.A.'s.A new generation of politicians is waking up to this issue. For instance, Andrew Rasiej is running in New York City's Democratic primary for public advocate on a platform calling for wireless (Wi-Fi) and cellphone Internet access from every home, business and school in the city. If, God forbid, a London-like attack happens in a New York subway, don't trying calling 911. Your phone won't work down there. No wireless infrastructure. This ain't Tokyo, pal.At the City Hall subway stop this morning, Mr. Rasiej plans to show how one makes a 911 call from the subway. He will have one aide with a tin can in the subway send a message to another aide holding a tin can connected by a string. Then the message will be passed by tin can and string up to Mr. Rasiej on the street, who will call 911 with his cellphone.''That is how you say something if you see something today in a New York subway -- tin cans connected to someone with a cellphone on the street,'' said Mr. Rasiej, a 47-year-old entrepreneur who founded an educational-technology nonprofit.Mr. Rasiej wants to see New York follow Philadelphia, which decided it wouldn't wait for private companies to provide connectivity to all. Instead, Philly made it a city-led project -- like sewers and electricity. The whole city will be a ''hot zone,'' where any resident anywhere with a computer, cellphone or P.D.A. will have cheap high-speed Wi-Fi access to the Internet.Mr. Rasiej argues that we can't trust the telecom companies to make sure that everyone is connected because new technologies, like free Internet telephony, threaten their business models. ''We can't trust the traditional politicians to be the engines of change for how people connect to their government and each other,'' he said. By the way, he added, ''If New York City goes wireless, the whole country goes wireless.''Mr. Rasiej is also promoting civic photo-blogging -- having people use their cellphones to take pictures of potholes or crime, and then, using Google maps, e-mailing the pictures and precise locations to City Hall.Message: In U.S. politics, the party that most quickly absorbs the latest technology often dominates. F.D.R. dominated radio and the fireside chat; J.F.K., televised debates; Republicans, direct mail and then talk radio, and now Karl Rove's networked voter databases.The technological model coming next -- which Howard Dean accidentally uncovered but never fully developed -- will revolve around the power of networks and blogging. The public official or candidate will no longer just be the one who talks to the many or tries to listen to the many. Rather, he or she will be a hub of connectivity for the many to work with the many -- creating networks of public advocates to identify and solve problems and get behind politicians who get it.''One elected official by himself can't solve the problems of eight million people,'' Mr. Rasiej argued, ''but eight million people networked together can solve one city's problems. They can spot and offer solutions better and faster than any bureaucrat.  The party that stakes out this new frontier will be the majority party in the 21st century. And the Democrats better understand something -- their base right now is the most disconnected from the network.''Can you hear me now?Op-Ed Columnist Maureen Dowd is on leave until Aug. 10.Wow, I am so relieved that Congress has finally agreed on an energy bill. Now that's out of the way, maybe Congress will focus on solving our energy problem.Sorry to be so cynical, but an energy bill that doesn't enjoin our auto companies to sharply improve their mileage standards is just not serious. This bill is what the energy expert Gal Luft calls ''the sum of all lobbies.'' While it contains some useful provisions, it also contains massive pork slabs dished out to the vested interests who need them least -- like oil companies -- and has no overarching strategy to deal with the new world.And the world has changed in the past few years. First, the global economic playing field is being leveled, and millions of people who were out of the game -- from China, India and the former Soviet empire -- are now walking onto the field, each dreaming of a house, a car, a toaster and a microwave. As they move from low-energy to high-energy consumers, they are becoming steadily rising competitors with us for oil.Second, we are in a war. It is a war against open societies mounted by Islamo-fascists, who are nurtured by mosques, charities and madrasas preaching an intolerant brand of Islam and financed by medieval regimes sustained by our oil purchases.Yes, we are financing both sides in the war on terrorism: our soldiers and the fascist terrorists. George Bush's failure, on the morning after 9/11, to call on Americans to accept a gasoline tax to curb our oil imports was one of the greatest wasted opportunities in U.S. history.Does the energy bill begin to remedy that? Hardly. It doesn't really touch the auto companies, which have used most of the technological advances of the last two decades to make our cars bigger and faster, rather than more fuel-efficient. Congress even rejected the idea of rating tires for fuel efficiency, which might have encouraged consumers to buy the most fuel-efficient treads.The White House? It blocked an amendment that would have required the president to find ways to cut oil use by one million barrels a day by 2015 -- on the grounds that it might have required imposing better fuel economy on our carmakers.We need a strategic approach to energy. We need to redesign work so more people work at home instead of driving in; we need to reconfigure our cars and mass transit; we need a broader definition of what we think of as fuel. And we need a tax policy that both entices, and compels, U.S. firms to be innovative with green energy solutions. This is going to be a huge global industry -- as China and India become high-impact consumers -- and we should lead it.Many technologies that could make a difference are already here -- from hybrid engines to ethanol. All that is needed is a gasoline tax of $2 a gallon to get consumers and Detroit to change their behavior and adopt them. As Representative Edward Markey noted, auto fuel economy peaked at 26.5 miles per gallon in 1986, and ''we've been going backward every since'' -- even though we have the technology to change that right now. ''This is not rocket science,'' he rightly noted. ''It's auto mechanics.''It's also imagination. ''During the 1973 Arab oil embargo Brazil was importing almost 80 percent of its fuel supply,'' notes Mr. Luft, director of the Institute for the Analysis of Global Security. ''Within three decades it cut its dependence by more than half.  During that period the Brazilians invested massively in a sugar-based ethanol industry to the degree that about a third of the fuel they use in their vehicles is domestically grown. They also created a fleet that can accommodate this fuel.'' Half the new cars sold this year in Brazil will run on any combination of gasoline and ethanol. ''Bringing hydrocarbons and carbohydrates to live happily together in the same fuel tank,'' he added, ''has not only made Brazil close to energy independence, but has also insulated the Brazilian economy from the harming impact of the current spike in oil prices.''The new energy bill includes support for corn-based ethanol, but, bowing to the dictates of the U.S. corn and sugar lobbies (which oppose sugar imports), it ignores Brazilian-style sugar-based ethanol, even though it takes much less energy to make and produces more energy than corn-based ethanol. We are ready to import oil from Saudi Arabia but not sugar from Brazil.The sum of all lobbies.It seems as though only a big crisis will force our country to override all the cynical lobbies and change our energy usage. I thought 9/11 was that crisis. It sure was for me, but not, it seems, for this White House, Congress or many Americans. Do we really have to wait for something bigger in order to get smarter?Op-Ed ColumnistOn the day after 9/11, I was in Jerusalem and was interviewed by Israeli TV. The reporter asked me, ''Do you think the Bush administration is up to responding to this attack?'' As best I can recall, I answered: ''Absolutely. One thing I can assure you about these guys is that they know how to pull the trigger.''It was just a gut reaction that George Bush and Dick Cheney were the right guys to deal with Osama. I was not alone in that feeling, and as a result, Mr. Bush got a mandate, almost a blank check, to rule from 9/11 that he never really earned at the polls. Unfortunately, he used that mandate not simply to confront the terrorists but to take a radically uncompassionate conservative agenda -- on taxes, stem cells, the environment and foreign treaties -- that was going nowhere before 9/11, and drive it into a post-9/11 world. In that sense, 9/11 distorted our politics and society.Well, if 9/11 is one bookend of the Bush administration, Katrina may be the other. If 9/11 put the wind at President Bush's back, Katrina's put the wind in his face. If the Bush-Cheney team seemed to be the right guys to deal with Osama, they seem exactly the wrong guys to deal with Katrina -- and all the rot and misplaced priorities it's exposed here at home.These are people so much better at inflicting pain than feeling it, so much better at taking things apart than putting them together, so much better at defending ''intelligent design'' as a theology than practicing it as a policy.For instance, it's unavoidably obvious that we need a real policy of energy conservation. But President Bush can barely choke out the word ''conservation.'' And can you imagine Mr. Cheney, who has already denounced conservation as a ''personal virtue'' irrelevant to national policy, now leading such a campaign or confronting oil companies for price gouging?And then there are the president's standard lines: ''It's not the government's money; it's your money,'' and, ''One of the last things that we need to do to this economy is to take money out of your pocket and fuel government.'' Maybe Mr. Bush will now also tell us: ''It's not the government's hurricane -- it's your hurricane.''An administration whose tax policy has been dominated by the toweringly selfish Grover Norquist -- who has been quoted as saying: ''I don't want to abolish government. I simply want to reduce it to the size where I can drag it into the bathroom and drown it in the bathtub'' -- doesn't have the instincts for this moment. Mr. Norquist is the only person about whom I would say this: I hope he owns property around the New Orleans levee that was never properly finished because of a lack of tax dollars. I hope his basement got flooded. And I hope that he was busy drowning government in his bathtub when the levee broke and that he had to wait for a U.S. Army helicopter to get out of town.The Bush team has engaged in a tax giveaway since 9/11 that has had one underlying assumption: There will never be another rainy day. Just spend money. You knew that sooner or later there would be a rainy day, but Karl Rove has assumed it wouldn't happen on Mr. Bush's watch -- that someone else would have to clean it up. Well, it did happen on his watch.Besides ripping away the roofs of New Orleans, Katrina ripped away the argument that we can cut taxes, properly educate our kids, compete with India and China, succeed in Iraq, keep improving the U.S. infrastructure, and take care of a catastrophic emergency -- without putting ourselves totally into the debt of Beijing.So many of the things the Bush team has ignored or distorted under the guise of fighting Osama were exposed by Katrina: its refusal to impose a gasoline tax after 9/11, which would have begun to shift our economy much sooner to more fuel-efficient cars, helped raise money for a rainy day and eased our dependence on the world's worst regimes for energy; its refusal to develop some form of national health care to cover the 40 million uninsured; and its insistence on cutting more taxes, even when that has contributed to incomplete levees and too small an Army to deal with Katrina, Osama and Saddam at the same time.As my Democratic entrepreneur friend Joel Hyatt once remarked, the Bush team's philosophy since 9/11 has been: ''We're at war. Let's party.''Well, the party is over. If Mr. Bush learns the lessons of Katrina, he has a chance to replace his 9/11 mandate with something new and relevant. If that happens, Katrina will have destroyed New Orleans, but helped to restore America. If Mr. Bush goes back to his politics as usual, he'll be thwarted at every turn. Katrina will have destroyed a city and a presidency.Op-Ed ColumnistMemo to: Iraq's Kurdish, Shiite and Sunni leaders.From: An American friend.Dear Sirs: As someone who really wishes you well, I am writing to give you my best sense of how the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina is going to affect the U.S. mission in Iraq. Let me begin with an analogy offered by Michael Mandelbaum, author of the forthcoming book ''The Case for Goliath: How America Acts as the World's Government in the 21st Century.'' He points out: ''The U.S. military presence in Iraq today is like the dikes and levees that were protecting New Orleans from the flood. The equivalent of the flood for Iraq is a civil war between Sunnis, Shiites and Kurds. The U.S. military right now is holding that back.''Therefore, the key question in Iraq is whether your constitutional process now unfolding can produce a power-sharing accord between Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds that can be a homegrown, self-sustaining dike against civil war, replacing the Americans. In the wake of Katrina, this is now an urgent question. No, we will not be pulling out tomorrow just because of Katrina, let alone before your December parliamentary elections. But after that, when we will be in a Congressional election year, who knows what pressures may build.Why? Because most Democrats have opposed the war from the start, and many Republicans no longer support the war per se, but only George Bush. The president has carried this war on his shoulders, and the more he's weakened politically by Katrina, the less he will be able to carry. Yes, Mr. Bush has said we'll do whatever it takes to finish the job in Iraq, but he said that before there was another huge job to do.Can you imagine if Mr. Bush had to go to Congress this week to ask for yet another $100 billion to keep fixing Iraq, when an entire U.S. city needs rebuilding? And the Katrina TV drama is not going away. Hell hath no fury like journalists with a compelling TV story where they get to be the heroes and the government the fools.Now, as for your draft constitution, it is at one level a remarkable document -- a rare example of the elected citizens of an Arab state having a horizontal dialogue and forging their own social contract. There is already more free politics in Iraq than anywhere else in the Arab world except Lebanon. But this draft constitution will come to life only if Iraqi Sunnis of good will publicly embrace it, and up to now they have not.Some Sunnis are intimidated, others are posturing for the elections, and some are acting in bad faith, still fantasizing that their Baath Party will come to power again. But Sunnis of good will, and Iraq has many, can be brought around if the constitution creates a politically and economically viable central government, and doesn't pave the way for Kurdish and Shiite separatism, which would leave the Sunnis isolated in central Iraq without power or oil.As Yitzhak Nakash, the Brandeis University expert on the Shiites, put it: ''We need to see a form of federalism in Iraq that is uniting Iraqis, not dividing them -- a form of federalism that gives Shiites, Sunnis and Kurds a degree of cultural and religious autonomy without compromising either Iraq's political unity or Baghdad's role as the locus of national politics. The draft constitution is not quite there yet.''I know how justifiably bitter the Shiites and the Kurds of Iraq are over what they have suffered at the hands of murderous Sunni Baathists and jihadist fascists. But it is in their interest and ours to see if we can nurture more Iraqi Sunnis who understand that their best future lies in working with a new Iraq, rather than trying to subvert it. Will Iraqi Sunnis, like the Palestinians, waste a generation trying to reverse history -- and destroy themselves and Iraq in the process? Or will they accept the fact that they are a minority that can no longer rule all of a fascist Iraq, but can get its fair share of power and oil in a free Iraq? I don't know.The only way to find out is to make them an offer they can't refuse. If there is a constitution basically supported by all the key parties, a decent outcome is still possible in Iraq. Yes, Mr. Bush says he intends to stay the course there no matter what, but without a constitution embraced by all three communities, there will be no course to stay. The pressure on us to leave will only grow.And if the dikes of stability that U.S. soldiers are holding together in Iraq give way, well, you all will envy the people of New Orleans. Most of them had somewhere to go when their floods hit. You and your neighbors will not.Op-Ed ColumnistThere is something troublingly self-indulgent and slothful about America today -- something that Katrina highlighted and that people who live in countries where the laws of gravity still apply really noticed. It has rattled them -- like watching a parent melt down.That is certainly the sense I got after observing the Katrina debacle from half a world away here in Singapore -- a city-state that, if it believes in anything, believes in good governance. It may roll up the sidewalks pretty early here, and it may even fine you if you spit out your gum, but if you had to choose anywhere in Asia you would want to be caught in a typhoon, it would be Singapore. Trust me, the head of Civil Defense here is not simply someone's college roommate.Indeed, Singapore believes so strongly that you have to get the best-qualified and least-corruptible people you can into senior positions in the government, judiciary and civil service that its pays its prime minister a salary of $1.1 million a year. It pays its cabinet ministers and Supreme Court justices just under $1 million a year, and pays judges and senior civil servants handsomely down the line.From Singapore's early years, good governance mattered because the ruling party was in a struggle for the people's hearts and minds with the Communists, who were perceived to be both noncorrupt and caring -- so the state had to be the same and more.Even after the Communists faded, Singapore maintained a tradition of good governance because as a country of only four million people with no natural resources, it had to live by its wits. It needed to run its economy and schools in a way that would extract the maximum from each citizen, which is how four million people built reserves of $100 billion.''In the areas that are critical to our survival, like Defense, Finance and the Ministry of Home Affairs, we look for the best talent,'' said Kishore Mahbubani, dean of the Lee Kwan Yew School of Public Policy. ''You lose New Orleans, and you have 100 other cities just like it. But we're a city-state. We lose Singapore and there is nothing else.  [So] the standards of discipline are very high. There is a very high degree of accountability in Singapore.''When a subway tunnel under construction collapsed here in April 2004 and four workers were killed, a government inquiry concluded that top executives of the contracting company should be either fined or jailed.The discipline that the cold war imposed on America, by contrast, seems to have faded. Last year, we cut the National Science Foundation budget, while indulging absurd creationist theories in our schools and passing pork-laden energy and transportation bills in the middle of an energy crisis.We let the families of the victims of 9/11 redesign our intelligence organizations, and our president and Congress held a midnight session about the health care of one woman, Terri Schiavo, while ignoring the health crisis of 40 million uninsured. Our economy seems to be fueled lately by either suing each other or selling each other houses. Our government launched a war in Iraq without any real plan for the morning after, and it cut taxes in the middle of that war, ensuring that future generations would get the bill.Speaking of Katrina, Sumiko Tan, a columnist for the Sunday edition of The Straits Times in Singapore, wrote: ''We were shocked at what we saw. Death and destruction from natural disaster is par for the course. But the pictures of dead people left uncollected on the streets, armed looters ransacking shops, survivors desperate to be rescued, racial divisions -- these were truly out of sync with what we'd imagined the land of the free to be, even if we had encountered homelessness and violence on visits there.  If America becomes so unglued when bad things happen in its own backyard, how can it fulfill its role as leader of the world?''Janadas Devan, a Straits Times columnist, tried to explain to his Asian readers how the U.S. is changing. ''Today's conservatives,'' he wrote, ''differ in one crucial aspect from yesterday's conservatives: the latter believed in small government, but believed, too, that a country ought to pay for all the government that it needed.''The former believe in no government, and therefore conclude that there is no need for a country to pay for even the government that it does have.  [But] it is not only government that doesn't show up when government is starved of resources and leached of all its meaning. Community doesn't show up either, sacrifice doesn't show up, pulling together doesn't show up, 'we're all in this together' doesn't show up.''Op-Ed ColumnistSingapore is a country that takes the Internet seriously. Last week its Ministry of Defense granted a deferment for the country's compulsory National Service to a Singaporean teenager so he could finish competing in the finals of the World Cyber Games -- the Olympics of online war games.Being a tiny city-state of four million, Singapore is obsessed with nurturing every ounce of talent of every single citizen. That is why, although its fourth and eighth graders already score at the top of the Timss international math and science tests, Singapore has been introducing more innovations into schools. Its government understands that in a flattening world, where more and more jobs can go anywhere, it's not enough to just stay ahead of its neighbors. It has to stay ahead of everyone -- including us.Message to America: They are not racing us to the bottom. They are racing us to the top.As Low-Sim Ay Nar, principal of Xinmin Secondary School, explained to me, Singapore has got rote learning down cold. No one is going to outdrill her students. What it is now focusing on is how to develop more of America's strength: getting Singaporean students and teachers to be more innovative and creative. ''Numerical skills are very important,'' she told me, but ''I am now also encouraging my students to be creative -- and empowering my teachers.  We have been loosening up and allowing people to grow their own ideas.''She added, ''We have shifted the emphasis from content alone to making use of the content'' on the principle that ''knowledge can be created in the classroom and doesn't just have to come from the teacher.''Toward that end, some Singapore schools have adopted a math teaching program called HeyMath, which was started four years ago in Chennai, India, by two young Indian bankers, Nirmala Sankaran and Harsh Rajan, in partnership with the Millennium Mathematics Project at Cambridge University.With a team of Indian, British and Chinese math and education specialists, the HeyMath group basically said to itself: If you were a parent anywhere in the world and you noticed that Singapore kids, or Indian kids or Chinese kids, were doing really well in math, wouldn't you like to see the best textbooks, teaching and assessment tools, or the lesson plans that they were using to teach fractions to fourth graders or quadratic equations to 10th graders? And wouldn't it be nice if one company then put all these best practices together with animation tools, and delivered them through the Internet so any teacher in the world could adopt or adapt them to his or her classroom? That's HeyMath.''No matter what kind of school their kids go to, parents all over the world are worried that their kids might be missing something,'' Mrs. Sankaran said. ''For some it is the right rigor, for some it is creativity. There is no perfect system.  What we have tried to do is create a platform for the continuous sharing of the best practices for teaching math concepts. So a teacher might say: 'I have a problem teaching congruence to 14-year-olds. What is the method they use in India or Shanghai?'''Singaporean math textbooks are very good. My daughter's school already uses them in Maryland. But they are static and not illustrated or animated. ''Our lessons contain animated visuals that remove the abstraction underlying the concept, provide interactivity for students to understand concepts in a 'hands on' manner and make connections to real-life contexts so that learning becomes relevant,'' Mrs. Sankaran said.HeyMath's mission is to be the math Google -- to establish a Web-based platform that enables every student and teacher to learn from the ''best teacher in the world'' for every math concept and to also be able to benchmark themselves against their peers globally.The HeyMath platform also includes an online repository of questions, indexed by concept and grade, so teachers can save time in devising homework and tests. Because HeyMath material is accompanied by animated lessons that students can do on their own online, it provides for a lot of self-learning. Indeed, HeyMath (see www.heymath.net), which has been adopted by 35 of Singapore's 165 schools, also provides an online tutor, based in India, to answer questions from students stuck on homework.Why am I writing about this? Because math and science are the keys to innovation and power in today's world, and American parents had better understand that the people who are eating their kids' lunch in math are not resting on their laurels.Op-Ed ColumnistFollowing President Bush's speech in New Orleans, many U.S. papers carried the same basic headline: ''Bush Rules Out Raising Taxes for Gulf Relief.'' The president is planning to rely on ''spending cuts'' instead to pay for rebuilding New Orleans. Yeah, right -- and if you believe that, I have some beachfront property in Biloxi I'd like to sell you. The underlying message of all these stories is that the Bush team sees no reason to change course in response to Katrina.I beg to differ. Katrina deprived the Bush team of the energy source that propelled it forward for the last four years: 9/11 and the halo over the presidency that came with it. The events of 9/11 created a deference in the U.S. public, and media, for the administration, which exploited it to the hilt to push an uncompassionate conservative agenda on tax cuts and runaway spending, on which it never could have gotten elected. That deference is over.If Mr. Bush wants to make anything of his second term, he'll have to do his own Nixon-to-China turnaround, reframe the debate and recast the priorities of his presidency. He seems to think that by offering to spend billions of dollars to rebuild one city, New Orleans, he'll get his leadership halo back. Wrong. Just throwing more borrowed money at New Orleans is not leadership. Mr. Bush needs to frame a new agenda for rebuilding all our cities and strengthening the nation as a whole. And what should be the centerpiece of a policy of American renewal is blindingly obvious: making a quest for energy independence the moon shot of our generation.The president should have done that on the morning of Sept. 12, 2001. The country was ready. But the president whiffed. Katrina -- nature's 9/11 -- has given him a rare do-over. Imagine -- I know it is a stretch -- that the president announced tomorrow that he wanted an immediate 50-cents-a-gallon gasoline tax -- the ''American Renewal Tax,'' to be used to rebuild New Orleans, pay down the deficit, fund tax breaks for Americans to convert their cars to hybrid technology or biofuels, fund a Manhattan Project to develop alternatives for energy independence, and subsidize mass transit systems for our major cities.And imagine if he tied this to an appeal to young people to go into science, math and engineering for the great national purpose of making us the greenest nation on the planet, to help liberate us from dependence on the worst regimes in the world for our oil and to help ease the global warming that is heating up the oceans, making our hurricanes more intense and our lowlands more vulnerable. America's kids are hungry to be challenged for some larger purpose, which has been utterly absent in this presidency.Americans will change their long-term energy habits, and companies will develop green products, only if they are certain the price of gasoline will not go back down. A gasoline tax (Americans have already shown they'll tolerate higher prices) and stronger regulation would force U.S. companies to innovate in what is going to be one of the most important global industries in the 21st century: green technologies. By coddling our auto and industrial companies when it comes to mileage standards and the environment, all the Bush team is doing is ensuring that they will be dinosaurs and that Chinese, Japanese and Indian companies will take the lead in green technologies -- because they have to and ours don't.Look what Jeff Immelt, the C.E.O. of G.E., said: ''America should strive to make energy and environmental practices a national core competency and by doing so, create exports in jobs.  America is the leading consumer of energy. However, we are not the technical leader. Europe today is the major force for environmental innovation. European governments have encouraged their companies to invest [in] and produce clean power technologies. The same is true for nuclear power.  And government policy that encourages this with subsidies and other incentives is giving European companies a leg up. While Europe has been a driver for innovation, China promises to be its market.''Setting the goal of energy independence, along with a gasoline tax, could help to solve so many of our problems today -- from the deficit to climate change and national security. And Americans would pay it if they thought the extra money was going to renew America, not Iran, and not just New Orleans. And if the Texas-oilman president became the energy-independence president -- now, that would snap heads and make this a truly relevant presidency.No way, you say. Probably right. But either Mr. Bush does a Nixon-to-China or his next three years are going to be a Bush-to-Nowhere.Op-Ed ColumnistNext Monday, Israel and the whole Middle East will witness a hugely important election. Ostensibly it is a vote over when the Likud Party should hold its primary. But it actually is a vote over who will lead Likud into the next election -- Prime Minister Ariel Sharon or his challenger, Bibi Netanyahu. If I could vote, there is no question whom I would cast my ballot for: Bibi. Yes, pray for Bibi to crush Mr. Sharon and drive him right out of the party. That's where Mr. Sharon belongs.Why, you ask? Because the Likud under Bibi, and without Ariel Sharon, will be free to be itself -- to represent the lunatic right in Israel, become a fringe party and drive over a cliff. Mr. Sharon will then also be free to be himself, to form a new party with other center-right and center-left figures, a party that can give Israel a solid majority for making a final settlement with the Palestinians -- provided they ever get their act together and turn Gaza, their ministate, into something more like Dubai and less like Mogadishu.''Sharon will only peel off from the Likud and start his own center party after he is persuaded that he has lost control of the Likud,'' said David Makovsky of the Washington Institute for Near East Policy, the author of a recent study on the Gaza disengagement. ''A Likud split would likely realign Israeli political parties so they more closely mirror the real views of the Israeli public. Right now, two-thirds of Israelis support a two-state solution with the Palestinians. A portion of this two-thirds was in the Likud and represented by Sharon. I would call them the 'hard-bargainers.' But many of the one-third who oppose any deal were also in the Likud. Call them the 'hard-liners.' Many of them view Bibi as their standard-bearer.''A new coalition made up of Mr. Sharon's followers from Likud, as well as the moderate Labor and Shinui Parties, ''could revitalize the Israeli center, which was decimated by the terror and violence between 2000 and 2004, by bringing together under one political tent that two-thirds who want a deal with the Palestinians based on secure borders,'' Mr. Makovsky said. ''This could be a winning ticket, so long as Hamas does not return to rocket and suicide attacks that, if past is prologue, would only bolster Bibi.''The whole debate about disengagement from Gaza exposed the real political trends in Israel today, precisely because having 8,000 Jews living in one-third of the Gaza Strip, surrounded by over 1.3 million Palestinians, had become utterly insane -- disconnected from any strategic, moral, demographic, nationalist or religious logic. Therefore, those who supported continuing the status quo in Gaza indefinitely, which included the whole hard-line wing of Likud, really identified themselves as Jewish extremists and messianists who are a danger to the future of Israel and the Jewish people.As the Haaretz newspaper essayist Ari Shavit put it, ''Following the disengagement, it is now clear that these are two different states: Israel on one hand, and the Likud state on the other. Israel wants sovereignty, a border and a clear national identity; the Likud state wants settlements, a mixed population and a blurred identity. Israel wants democracy, rationality and enlightenment; the Likud state wants corruption, slaps on the back and emotional storms.  In the past, the Likud state could be credited with representing the people. But no longer.''Therefore, the time has come to choose: Israel or the Likud state. The Israeli republic or the republic of the Likud Central Committee.  Without dividing the Likud, it will be impossible to divide the land. Without setting a border for the Likud, it will be impossible to set a border for Israel.''There is something about the international climate today -- the U.S. invasion of Iraq, the pressures of globalization, rising middle classes who want stability and the passing of a generation of charismatic leaders -- that is blowing apart many of the stale political arrangements that have long governed Arab-Israeli politics. Syria has been forced out of Lebanon. Israel has unilaterally pulled out of Gaza. Egypt has held its first quasi-multiparty election. The Palestinian Authority has imploded with the death of Yasir Arafat, and the Baathists have been blown up by the Bushes.The laws of gravity are finally forcing some reality politics on the Middle East, except in those countries with oil.If Israel is the harbinger, maybe the moderate majorities will finally get together out of necessity and start burying the past, rather than continuing to let themselves be manipulated by fanatic minorities who want to bury the future.Op-Ed ColumnistEven a brief visit to this southern Iraq port leaves me convinced that we are entering the endgame here. The coming Iraqi votes, in October over the new constitution and in December over a new Parliament, are going to tell America whether it is worth staying here or not for much longer.Despite all the shameful blunders of Donald Rumsfeld, Iraq, at the end of the day, was always going to be what the Iraqis decided to make of it. And those in the Iraqi majority -- the Shiites and Kurds who make up roughly 80 percent of this country -- have spoken. They want an Iraq that will be decentralized and will allow each of their communities to run its own affairs and culture -- without fear of ever again being dominated and brutalized by an oil-backed Sunni minority regime in Baghdad.Equally important, both the Kurds and the Shiites have made it clear that they have no interest in telling the Sunnis how to live, and will cut them a slice of Iraq's oil revenue and maintain Iraq's basic Arab identity.So now we know what kind of majority the Kurds and Shiites want to be, the question is what kind of minority the Iraqi Sunnis want to be. Do they want to be the Palestinians and spend the next 100 years trying to mobilize the Arab-Muslim world to reverse history and restore their ''right'' to rule Iraq as a minority -- a move that would destroy them and Iraq?Or do they want to embrace the future? I know the Sunnis are terrified by Iran's influence in this southern region, but, as the Brits who run the Basra area, which includes Umm Qasr, will tell you, the Iraqi Arab Shiites here are obsessed with not being dominated by Iran. Despite growing cultural and commercial ties with Iran, they are Iraqis first. That attitude would only be enhanced if Iraqi Sunnis, rather than allowing or abetting the murders of Shiites, would instead embrace the new constitution and let the U.S. cut the Sunnis an even fairer slice of the pie.''We have a lot of overlapping interests with the Sunnis of Iraq,'' a senior U.S. official in Baghdad said. Indeed, in the latter stages of the constitutional negotiations in Iraq, the talented U.S. ambassador in Baghdad, Zalmay Khalilzad, was basically acting as the Sunnis' lawyer in dealings with the Kurds and Shiites. The problem was that the Sunnis never knew when to say yes, ''that's enough,'' and the U.S. got fed up with their demanding much more than their due.Do the Iraqi Sunnis understand their own interests, and does the Sunni world have any moral center? Up to now the Sunni Arab world has stood mute while the Sunni Baathists and jihadists in Iraq have engaged in what can only be called ''ethnic cleansing'': murdering Shiite civilians in large numbers purely because they are Shiites in hopes of restoring a Sunni-dominated order in Iraq that is un-restorable. A fatwa has just been issued against a female Indian tennis player who is Muslim, condemning her for her short skirts, but no fatwa has been issued by Sunni clerics condemning Zarqawi's butchering of Iraqi Shiite children and teachers.Some courageous Sunnis have begun to speak out. ''One of the most bizarre phenomena of recent times has been the refusal of Arab governments to condemn terrorist acts in Iraq or to commiserate with the victims,'' Abdul Rahman al-Rashed wrote in the Saudi daily Asharq Al Awsat. He added, ''Take the most recent atrocities in which more than 200 Iraqis lost their lives in two days of carnage: no Arab government raised its voice in condemnation, although most of them shrilly objected when the new Iraqi constitution failed to mention that the country was part of the Arab nation. The official Arab position vis-à-vis Iraq has always been spineless.''So, folks, we are faltering in Iraq today in part because of the Bush team's incompetence, but also because of the moral vacuum in the Sunni Arab world, where the worst are engaged in murderous ethnic cleansing -- and trying to stifle any prospect of democracy here -- and the rest are too afraid, too weak, too lost or too anti-Shiite to do anything about it.Maybe the cynical Europeans were right. Maybe this neighborhood is just beyond transformation. That will become clear in the next few months as we see just what kind of minority the Sunnis in Iraq intend to be. If they come around, a decent outcome in Iraq is still possible, and we should stay to help build it. If they won't, then we are wasting our time. We should arm the Shiites and Kurds and leave the Sunnis of Iraq to reap the wind. We must not throw more good American lives after good American lives for people who hate others more than they love their own children.Op-Ed ColumnistTo reach the headquarters of the Iraqi Navy in the port of Umm Qasr, my U.S. Navy escort and I had to drive in from Kuwait. We were met at the border by two jeeps with the Royal Marines who escorted us to Umm Qasr at dusk. Even though this is the safest part of Iraq, we had to be outfitted in body armor, and the Royal Marines had their automatic weapons loaded and ready. They kept every civilian car we passed, every kid on a bicycle, in their sights, just in case one was a suicide bomber.And no wonder -- roadside bombs have suddenly started to appear on this route. And the enemy just keeps getting smarter. After the coalition forces introduced jamming devices to block roadside bombs detonated with cellphones, the insurgents started using infrared devices from garage door openers. So much ingenuity for so much malevolence. And this is the safe, Shiite part of Iraq.The British Royal Navy is in charge of training the 1,000-man Iraqi Navy, which I wanted to see for two reasons. First, the effort to get Iraq's Navy back afloat is a microcosm of all the good, the bad and the ugly that is involved in trying to rebuild Iraq's military. And second, the Iraqi Navy has a very important job: with U.S., British and Australian help, it oversees Iraq's only port and the two oil pumping platforms off the coast of Umm Qasr. This is where virtually all of Iraq's one million barrels of oil -- nearly 90 percent of Iraq's G.D.P. -- gets loaded onto tankers daily.The good news? The Umm Qasr port is busy today -- 50 cargo ships a month offload air-conditioners, refrigerators, microwaves, satellite dishes and cars for Iraqi consumers. Virtually every Iraqi naval officer I encountered had his own cellphone. Three years ago no one here had one. And considering that 18 months ago Iraq had no working navy, the fact that it now has a cadre of officers who have taken over the training, so the British and U.S. Coast Guard contingents here can focus on training the trainers, is also real progress.But progress is slow. One day last week a whole boatload of Iraqi sailors decided to take a long lunch break and blew off the afternoon training. Too hot. When sailors misbehave, the Iraqis fall back on Saddamist discipline. The other day, an Iraqi officer suggested to his British adviser that a misbehaving sailor be buried in sand up to his neck.The biggest challenge, explained Capt. John Clink of the Royal Navy, is getting middle-management Iraqis to take the initiative, especially when things go wrong. This requires a huge cultural shift.Saddam's tyrannical rule over nearly three decades conditioned people here never to assume responsibility.''There is a huge problem with fear of blame, fear of failure,'' Captain Clink said. ''The result is a tendency to look away when a problem arises, to ignore it or just not do anything in the hopes that it will all go away.'' A vast majority of Iraqi military personnel, Captain Clink added, ''have had the initiative kicked out of them by decades of repression.  When Patrol Boat 1 breaks down, it is amazingly difficult to get them to decide how to get around the problem. They want to refer everything to the operational commander.''At the younger level, though, the 25-year-olds, you start to see a completely different outlook on life. They are not superstars, but you see better English, more initiative, better leadership. And these are the guys out driving the patrol boats.''The problem is that the Iraqi Ministry of Defense in Baghdad is so dysfunctional that it is next to impossible to get these Iraqi junior officers promoted. And one month last summer the whole Iraqi Navy didn't get paid.The Iraqi government ordered three new fast patrol boats from a contractor in Baghdad for millions of dollars. They are being finished on the dock in Umm Qasr, but no one knows whether they will stay afloat, because of all the extras that were added by the Iraqis without regard to seaworthiness.The Iraqi Navy has a couple of terrific, dedicated commanders -- real leaders, respected by their men. But when they go back home to lawless Basra, they never know whether masked men will attack them, as has happened to colleagues. And behind these few real leaders, there is no effective middle management.So yes, we've trained a lot of Iraqi soldiers in the last 18 months, but that is not the relevant number. The relevant number is how many will be paid on time, how many will get promoted when they've earned it, how many will show up for training after lunch, how many will follow when their commander says charge, and how many can go home on weekends and tell people what they really do. That number has a long way to go.Op-Ed ColumnistI never sleep well on warships.So it was no surprise to me that I woke up at 5 a.m. the other day in my tiny guest bunk on the U.S.S. Chosin, which commands the U.S. Navy task force off the coast of Iraq. As I walked laps around the deck in the predawn light, my mind kept coming back to the incredible clash I had witnessed between the political culture of the U.S. Navy and the political culture of both the Iraqis on land and the Arab fishermen in the Persian Gulf.Iraq is a multiethnic society that had to be held together by a dictator's iron fist. What Iraqis are struggling with today is whether they can forge their own social contract in which Kurds, Shiites and Sunnis can live together -- without an iron fist. That is critical because virtually every Arab state today is a mix of religions and ethnicities held together by a hard or soft fist. If Iraqis can find a way to live together, any people out here can, and democracy has a future. If the Iraqis can't, probably no one can, and we can look forward to dictatorships and monarchies in the Arab world -- with all the pathologies they bring -- forever. But change is hard.When the Iraqi Navy drops you off on the Chosin, a guided-missile cruiser, two things just hit you in the face: one is the diversity of the U.S. Navy -- blacks, whites, Hispanics, Christians, Jews, atheists, Muslims, all working together, bound by a shared idea, not an iron fist. To be sure, it took America a good 150 years after independence to embrace pluralism and women's rights, and we're still working at it. Nevertheless, America today is so different from anything in this part of the world. The Iraqi Navy is all men, and almost all Shiites. We are like Martians to them.Mustapha Ahansal is a Moroccan-American sailor who acts as the Chosin's Arabic translator when it boards ships in the gulf to look for pirates or terrorists. ''The first time I boarded a boat,'' he told me, ''we had six or seven people -- one Hispanic, one black person, a white person, maybe a woman in our unit. Their sailors said to me, 'I thought all Americans were white.' Then one of them asked me, 'Are you in the military?'  It shocks them actually. They never knew that such a world actually exists, because they have their own problems. I was talking to one of their higher-ups in their Coast Guard and he said: 'It is amazing how you guys can be so many religions, ethnic groups and still make this thing work and be the best in the world. And here we are fighting north and south, and we are all cousins and brothers.'''The other thing that hits you on the Chosin is that many officers are women -- so you hear women's voices all day long giving orders over the ship's loudspeaker and radio. And because the local Arab fishermen also hear this chatter, many of them probably think the Chosin is an all-female ship! The 110-foot U.S. Coast Guard cutter Monomoy, alongside the Chosin, has a female deputy captain, who often leads the landing parties that inspect boats in the gulf; one of the Navy's fast patrol boats, also alongside the Chosin, had a female captain. ''Being a female boarding officer is a huge asset because they are so curious they want to talk to us more, so we can learn more things,'' said Renya Hernandez, the 24-year-old female exec officer of the Monomoy.Nagga Haizlip is an Iranian-American sailor who translates into Farsi for the Chosin when it confronts Iran's Revolutionary Guard Navy. Dressed in navy fatigues, she told me: ''If I call [the Iranians] on bridge-to-bridge radio they will not want to talk to me.  They will say, 'I want to speak to a man.''' As for the Iranian fishermen: ''They don't understand I am actually in the U.S. Navy. That surprises them.  It is different from their culture. They ask how do people get along [on the Chosin] and how do they live together? They are curious.''In trying to bring some democracy to Iraq, we are not just challenging the dictatorial-tribal political order here, but the male-dominated culture as well. In effect, we are promoting two revolutions at once: Jefferson versus Saddam and Sinbad versus the Little Mermaids -- who turn out to be captains of ships. Succeeding in this venture, to stem the drift of the Arab world toward Islamo-fascism and autocracy, is so much more important than the war critics have ever allowed. But it is also so much more difficult than the Bush team ever understood or prepared for -- even though it was warned. The Bush team's greatest sin was not thinking that this war was important. It was thinking that it would be easy.Because, as any ship captain on the gulf will tell you, we are sailing right into the prevailing winds.Op-Ed ColumnistWhen the definitive history of the Iraq war is written, future historians will surely want to ask Saddam Hussein and George W. Bush each one big question. To Saddam, the question would be: What were you thinking? If you had no weapons of mass destruction, why did you keep acting as though you did? For Mr. Bush, the question would be: What were you thinking? If you bet your whole presidency on succeeding in Iraq, why did you let Donald Rumsfeld run the war with just enough troops to lose? Why didn't you establish security inside Iraq and along its borders? How could you ever have thought this would be easy?The answer to these questions can be found in what was America's greatest intelligence failure in Iraq -- and that was not about W.M.D.Let me explain. While visiting the Iraqi port of Umm Qasr last week, I spent a morning watching the commanders of the Iraqi Navy hold a staff meeting, while their British and U.S. advisers looked on. On the one hand, you felt as if they were doing a pretty good imitation of a British command briefing. On the other hand, the slightly ragged quality left you feeling that if you pulled the British and U.S. advisers out tomorrow, the whole Iraqi Navy would collapse. The human capital and institutional foundation are simply not there yet. ''How these guys ever fought the Iranians for eight years, I will never know,'' a British trainer remarked to me.After that staff meeting, a British Royal Navy officer who was escorting me suggested that we go to Basra to see the flea market there. He said I could find anything I wanted, because so many Iraqis have had to hock basic household goods -- stereos, refrigerators, air-conditioners, cars -- to survive the last decade under Saddam.Message: Failing to find W.M.D. was a big intelligence failure. But the even bigger failure -- the one that is the source of all our troubles today -- was the failure to understand just how devastated Iraq's society, economy and institutions had become -- after eight years of war with Iran, a crushing defeat in Gulf War I and then a decade of U.N. sanctions.But I think Saddam knew how busted and bankrupt his country and army were. Therefore, he never wanted to completely erase the impression that he had W.M.D. Saddam lived in a den of wolves. The hint of W.M.D. was his only deterrent shield left against his neighbors, his enemies at home and the West. (This was alluded to in the Duelfer W.M.D. report.) So he tried to allow just enough U.N. inspections to clear him on W.M.D., while playing just enough cat and mouse with the U.N. to leave the impression that he still had something dangerous in the closet.The Bush team, and the C.I.A., not only failed to learn that Saddam had no W.M.D., they failed to appreciate how devastated Iraqi society really was. The Bush team, listening largely to exiles who had not lived in Iraq for years, thought that there were much more of an Iraqi middle class and more institutions than actually existed. So Mr. Bush thought taking over Iraq would be easy. That is the only way I can explain his behavior.This intelligence failure about Iraqi society is what is killing us today. Because what really happened after the U.S. invasion is that what little Iraqi state existed just fell apart in our hands, like a broken vase. And then Rummy let the shards get looted. So yes, when the Bush team says rebuilding Iraq is like rebuilding Germany, it's half right. It is like rebuilding Germany, but not post-World War II Germany. It is like rebuilding medieval, pre-modern Germany -- the Germany of clans and feudal fiefs, before there was a state.As this column has long insisted, we are not doing nation-building in Iraq. We are doing nation-creating. It is hugely important, but hugely difficult. I can only assume the C.I.A. didn't know how broken Iraq was, because if the president knew and still put in so few troops, it was criminal.Sadly, what Iraq desperately needs most from the U.S. today are A.I.D. workers, State Department advisers and technical experts from every agency of the government who can help rebuild Iraq's human capital. But people are afraid to go. And who can blame them? We have never established basic public order there, because we never had enough troops.The president's speech on terrorism yesterday was excellent. He made clear, better than ever, why winning in Iraq is so important to the wider struggle against Islamo-fascism. But it only makes me that much more angry that he fought this war as though it would be easy -- never asking for any sacrifice, any military draft, any tax hikes or any gasoline tax -- and that he tolerated so much incompetence along the way.Op-Ed ColumnistIf I were editor of this newspaper, I would have led last Thursday's issue with the news report, under a big headline, saying that a Sunni Muslim suicide bomber attacked the Shiite mosque in Hilla, Iraq, on Wednesday -- the Shiites' first day of Ramadan -- and blew himself up, killing at least 25 worshipers and wounding more than 87. The worshipers had come to the mosque not only to mark the start of the Muslim holy month, but also to mourn a Shiite restaurant owner who had been killed by insurgents a few days earlier. According to The A.P., ''The explosion hit the Husseiniyat Ibn al-Nama mosque, ripping through strings of light bulbs and green and red flags hung around the entrance to celebrate the start of the holy month.''This attack, which got scant attention, deserved much, much more because it's the essence of the terrorism problem we now face. When a Sunni Muslim jihadist blows up a Shiite mosque -- a mosque -- during Ramadan -- Ramadan -- and virtually no one in the Sunni world utters a word of condemnation, it means there is no controlling moral authority in the Sunni Muslim community anymore.When Sunni Muslim insurgents have no respect for the sanctity of Muslim lives, Muslim houses of worship or Muslim holy days -- and no one from their own wider Sunni community really moves to restrain or censure them -- then there are no boundaries anymore. No one is safe. Anything goes, against anyone, anywhere. If the Sunni Muslim world does not act to halt this genocidal ethnic-cleansing campaign against the Shiites of Iraq, which this week included a teacher's being dragged from a classroom and shot in front of his students, the Sunni world will eventually be consumed by this very violence. A civilization that tolerates suicide bombing is itself committing suicide.Inexplicably to me, the Bush team, which has finally settled on the right rationale for the war in Iraq -- to help Arabs carve out a space in the heart of their world where they can create a decent, progressive future, instead of drifting aimlessly under autocrats and worshiping a glorious past -- is equally silent. Instead of going to the U.N. and seeking a resolution declaring the Sunni terrorist Abu Musab al-Zarqawi and his ilk war criminals, it sends Karen Hughes around the Arab world to get flagellated by Sunni Muslim women for how awful we are.The Bush team calls that ''public diplomacy.'' I call it losing a public relations war to mass murderers.Yes, we, too, are hypocrites. I think the U.S. abuses of prisoners of war in Iraq and Afghanistan (we apparently tortured to death scores of prisoners in our custody) is a lasting blot on us all. But at least we have news media, a religious elite and courts that are exposing this, and a Senate majority that is now acting to bring it to a halt.As Human Rights Watch noted in an Oct. 3 report, U.S. abuses in Iraq cannot justify the deliberate attacks by Iraqi insurgents on civilians, which ''are serious violations of international humanitarian law -- war crimes -- and in some cases they are crimes against humanity.  Not only should all insurgent groups in Iraq cease such attacks, but the political and religious leaders in Iraq and other countries who have expressed support for the insurgency should condemn the targeting of civilians.''But try to find an Arab head of state, or a major Sunni Arab cleric, who has consistently and repeatedly condemned Zarqawi or bin Laden by name. There are very, very few. Oh, yes, they arrest these jihadists in their own countries. But they rarely take them on -- head on -- in the war of ideas, because they are afraid of their own Sunni fundamentalists, many of whom tacitly support the war on Shiites.And that is a real problem. Because there is only one way to stop this terrorism we are seeing from Indonesia to Iraq and from Madrid to London: it takes a village. It will stop only when the religious and political leaders, and parents, in these Sunni Muslim communities delegitimize it and anyone who engages in it.Western leaders keep saying after every terrorist attack, ''This is not about Islam.'' Sorry, but this is all about Islam. It is about a war within Islam between a jihadist-fascist minority engaged in crimes against humanity in the name of Islam, and a passive Sunni silent majority. Many of those Sunnis, I'm sure, are appalled by the violence against Iraqi civilians, but are too afraid, too morally leaderless or too quietly anti-Shiite to act.As I said, a civilization that tolerates suicide-genocide will eventually be devoured by its extremists from within -- and quarantined by its friends from abroad.Op-Ed ColumnistWhat if we were really having a national discussion about what is most important to the country today and on the minds of most parents?I have no doubt that it would be a loud, noisy dinner-table conversation about why so many U.S. manufacturers are moving abroad -- not just to find lower wages, but to find smarter workers, better infrastructure and cheaper health care. It would be about why in Germany, 36 percent of undergrads receive degrees in science and engineering; in China, 59 percent; in Japan, 66 percent; and in America, only 32 percent. It would be about why Japanese on bullet trains can get access to the Internet with cellphones, and Americans get their cellphone service interrupted five minutes from home.It would be about why U.S. 12th graders recently performed below the international average for 21 countries in math and science, and it would be about why, in recent years, U.S. industry appears to have spent more on lawsuits than on R.&D. Yes, we'd be talking about why the world is racing us to the top, not the bottom, and why we are quietly falling behind.And late in the evening, as the wine bottles emptied, someone at the national dinner table might finally say: ''Hey, what if we were really thinking ahead? What if we asked some of the country's best minds to make a list of the steps we could take right now to enhance America's technology base?''Fortunately, two senators, Lamar Alexander and Jeff Bingaman, asked the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering and the Institute of Medicine to form a bipartisan study group to produce just such a list, which was released on Wednesday in a report called ''Rising Above the Gathering Storm.''Because of globalization, the report begins, U.S. ''workers in virtually every sector must now face competitors who live just a mouse-click away in Ireland, Finland, India or dozens of other nations whose economies are growing.  Having reviewed the trends in the United States and abroad, the committee is deeply concerned that the scientific and technical building blocks of our economic leadership are eroding at a time when many other nations are gathering strength.  We are worried about the future prosperity of the United States.  We fear the abruptness with which a lead in science and technology can be lost and the difficulty of recovering a lead once lost -- if indeed it can be regained at all.''The report's key recommendations? Nothing fancy. Charles Vest, the former president of M.I.T., summed them up: ''We need to get back to basic blocking and tackling'' -- educating more Americans in the skills needed for 21st-century jobs.Among the top priorities, the report says, should be these:(1)Annually recruiting 10,000 science and math teachers by awarding four-year merit-based scholarships, to be paid back through five years of K-12 public school teaching. (We have too many unqualified science and math teachers.)(2)Strengthening the math and science skills of 250,000 other teachers through extracurricular programs.(3)Creating opportunities and incentives for many more middle school and high school students to take advanced math and science courses, by offering, among other things, $100 mini-scholarships for success in exams, and creating more specialty math-and-science schools.(4)Increasing federal investment in long-term basic research by 10 percent a year over the next seven years.(5)Annually providing research grants of $500,000 each, payable over five years, to 200 of America's most outstanding young researchers.(6)Creating a new Advanced Research Projects Agency in the Energy Department to support ''creative out-of-the-box transformational energy research that industry by itself cannot or will not support and in which risk may be high, but success would provide dramatic benefits for the nation.''(7)Granting automatic one-year visa extensions to foreign students in the U.S. who receive doctorates in science, engineering or math so they can seek employment here, and creating 5,000 National Science Foundation-administered graduate fellowships to increase the number of U.S. citizens earning doctoral degrees in fields of ''national need.'' (See the rest at www.nationalacademies.org.)These proposals are the new New Deal urgently called for by our times. This is where President Bush should have focused his second term, instead of squandering it on a silly, ideological jag called Social Security privatization. Because, as this report concludes, ''Without a renewed effort to bolster the foundations of our competitiveness, we can expect to lose our privileged position.''Op-Ed ColumnistA delegation of Iraqi judges and journalists abruptly left the U.S. today, cutting short its visit to study the workings of American democracy. A delegation spokesman said the Iraqis were ''bewildered'' by some of the behavior of the Bush administration and felt it was best to limit their exposure to the U.S. system at this time, when Iraq is taking its first baby steps toward democracy.The lead Iraqi delegate, Muhammad Mithaqi, a noted secular Sunni judge who had recently survived an assassination attempt by Islamist radicals, said that he was stunned when he heard President Bush telling Republicans that one reason they should support Harriet Miers for the U.S. Supreme Court was because of ''her religion.'' She is described as a devout evangelical Christian.Mithaqi said that after two years of being lectured to by U.S. diplomats in Baghdad about the need to separate ''mosque from state'' in the new Iraq, he was also floored to read that the former Whitewater prosecutor Kenneth Starr, now a law school dean, said on the radio show of the conservative James Dobson that Miers deserved support because she was ''a very, very strong Christian [who] should be a source of great comfort and assistance to people in the households of faith around the country.''''Now let me get this straight,'' Judge Mithaqi said. ''You are lecturing us about keeping religion out of politics, and then your own president and conservative legal scholars go and tell your public to endorse Miers as a Supreme Court justice because she is an evangelical Christian.''How would you feel if you picked up your newspapers next week and read that the president of Iraq justified the appointment of an Iraqi Supreme Court justice by telling Iraqis: 'Don't pay attention to his lack of legal expertise. Pay attention to the fact that he is a Muslim fundamentalist and prays at a Saudi-funded Wahhabi mosque.' Is that the Iraq you sent your sons to build and to die for? I don't think so. We can't have our people exposed to such talk.''A fellow delegation member, Abdul Wahab al-Unfi, a Shiite lawyer who walks with a limp today as a result of torture in a Saddam prison, said he did not want to spend another day in Washington after listening to the Bush team defend its right to use torture in Iraq and Afghanistan. Unfi said he was heartened by the fact that the Senate voted 90 to 9 to ban U.S. torture of military prisoners. But he said he was depressed by reports that the White House might veto the bill because of that amendment, which would ban ''cruel, inhuman or degrading'' treatment of P.O.W.'s.''I survived eight years of torture under Saddam,'' Unfi said. ''Virtually every extended family in Iraq has someone who was tortured or killed in a Baathist prison. Yet, already, more than 100 prisoners of war have died in U.S. custody. How is that possible from the greatest democracy in the world? There must be no place for torture in the future Iraq. We are going home now because I don't want our delegation corrupted by all this American right-to-torture talk.''Finally, the delegation member Sahaf al-Sahafi, editor of one of Iraq's new newspapers, said he wanted to go home after watching a televised videoconference last Thursday between soldiers in Iraq and President Bush. The soldiers, 10 Americans and an Iraqi, were coached by a Pentagon aide on how to respond to Mr. Bush.''I had nightmares watching this,'' Sahafi said. ''It was right from the Saddam playbook. I was particularly upset to hear the Iraqi sergeant major, Akeel Shakir Nasser, tell Mr. Bush: 'Thank you very much for everything. I like you.' It was exactly the kind of staged encounter that Saddam used to have with his troops.''Sahafi said he was also floored to see the U.S. Government Accountability Office, a nonpartisan agency that works for Congress, declare that a Bush administration contract that paid Armstrong Williams, a supposedly independent commentator, to promote Mr. Bush's No Child Left Behind policy constituted illegal propaganda -- an attempt by the government to buy good press.''Saddam bought and paid journalists all over the Arab world,'' Sahafi said. ''It makes me sick to see even a drop of that in America.''By coincidence, the Iraqi delegates departed Washington just as the Bush aide Karen Hughes returned from the Middle East. Her trip was aimed at improving America's image among Muslims by giving them a more accurate view of America and President Bush. She said, ''The more they know about us, the more they will like us.''(Yes, all of this is a fake news story. I just wish that it weren't so true.)Op-Ed ColumnistAnd you thought the Cultural Revolution was over. Sorry, it's just beginning, only China's new Cultural Revolution will be driven this time from the bottom up -- by podcasters with Apple's little white iPods or competing players, not from the top down by Maoists with Little Red Books.Yes, I know, I am a little ahead of myself. Very few Chinese have ever even seen an iPod, so the podcasting that does exist here is largely done through PC's. (Podcasting is the technology that enables individuals to produce their own poetry and songs, videos and photos, and upload them onto a podcasting Web site, then offer this content to anyone who wants to sample it or subscribe to it.) Once the prices come down for iPods, both for those that play audio and for Apple's newest version, which also plays video, there will be a huge market here for Chinese-language podcasting.I got a little glimpse of the future visiting a small apartment in suburban Shanghai, home to China's leading podcasting Web site, Toodou.com.''We already have 13,000 channels on our site and about 5,000 of them are updated regularly,'' said Gary Wang, 32, the Fuzhou-born and U.S.- and French-educated Chinese engineer who founded Toodou. Any Chinese can create his or her own channel of video or audio content on Toodou (which means ''potato''), and other individuals sign up to get that channel's new uploads. Eventually Toodou will charge a monthly subscription fee.''I want to create hundreds of thousands of different channels, maintained by just average people, where other people can access them and download the material,'' Mr. Wang added. And he will, because of how easy it is to upload and podcast homemade video and audio content. There are almost no barriers to entry. (His site does self-censor porn and anything that's obviously against Chinese law -- but anything else goes.)Toodou's most popular podcast today shows two 20-year-old Chinese women who lip-sync a popular Cantonese rock tune. ''They got bored,'' Mr. Wang explained, so they bought their own Webcam, which you can find here for as little as $6, used Microsoft Movie Maker, which is free with Windows XP, made their own little three-minute MTV-like podcast and uploaded it onto Toodou.com. It's been viewed 75,000 times in three months.''It took them one hour to make and 15 minutes to edit,'' Mr. Wang said. The women, called the Beans, now have their own Internet fan club.Another favorite is a podcast by two Chinese architecture students in Houston Rockets jerseys (the team of the Chinese N.B.A. star Yao Ming) who lip-sync a Backstreet Boys tune. A slide show on life in Shenzhen has been viewed 16,000 times, with lots of accompanying commentary from viewers. The second-most-popular podcast right now shows an underground rock band at a Shanghai bar.Toodou's goal, Mr. Wang said, ''will be to connect [Chinese] people to their tastes and to their potential collaborators. We will have a huge content database, and we will share the revenue with content providers.''For now, a lot of it is junk, but that will change. The podcasting tools are so easy to acquire that it will force competition, experimentation and better quality. Mr. Wang first heard of podcasting only 13 months ago. Today he has the most popular podcasting site in China, with 100,000 registered users, 8 employees, 40 volunteers and a U.S. venture-capital backer.News of his site was spread free by Chinese bloggers. His office costs $500 a month, and some of the employees sleep there. Almost all of the software that runs Toodou.com is from free open-source material on the Web: an Apache Web server; FreeBSD, a free Unix operating system; MySQL, a free database system; and PHP, free programming lingo. Mr. Wang wrote the basic algorithms that run Toodou.com himself.Unlike earlier techno-media revolutions, which began in the West and moved East, the podcasting revolution is going to explode everywhere at once, thanks to the Web and free technology tools. That's why the next phase of globalization is not going to be more Americanization, but more ''glocalization'' -- more and more local content made global.''We have different songs and we want to express different things, but the desire is the same,'' Mr. Wang said. ''We all want to be seen and heard and be able to create stuff we like and share it.  People from all over the world will draw knowledge and inspiration from the same technology platform, but different cultures will flourish on it. It is the same soil, but different trees will grow.''Op-Ed ColumnistYou don't see this every day: A columnist for The China Daily wrote an essay last week proposing that the Chinese consider eating with their hands and abandon chopsticks. Why?Because, Zou Hanru wrote, ''we no longer have abundant forest cover, our land is no longer that green, our water tables are depleting and our numbers are expanding faster than ever.  China itself uses 45 billion pairs of disposable chopsticks a year, or 1.66 million cubic meters of timber, or 25 million full-grown trees.'' The more affluent the Chinese become, he added, ''the more the demand for bigger homes and a wide range of furniture. Newspapers get thicker in their bid to grab a bigger share of the advertising market.''In the face of rising environmental pressures, he said, China must abandon disposable wooden chopsticks and move to reusable steel, ''or, better still, we can use our hands.''Mr. Zou's column underscores that while year after year of 9 percent growth may be economically sustainable for China, it is reaching its environmental limits. That pressure hits you the minute you land in Shanghai.As you wait for 90 minutes to get your visa stamped at the airport, crushed between traveling Chinese and visiting investors, you can feel that you are in a country engaged in extreme capitalism. Every other person around me in the visa line was already on a cellphone or P.D.A. -- as if people could not wait to get through passport control to start doing deals.Not only is China not a communist country anymore, but it may also now be the world's most capitalist country in terms of raw energy. Indeed, I believe history will record that it was Chinese capitalism that put an end to European socialism. Europe can no longer sustain its 35-hour workweeks and lavish welfare states because of the rising competition from low-wage, high-aspiration China, as well as from India and Eastern Europe.But can anything stop Chinese capitalism? Yes, Chinese capitalism. Other than political breakdown, the biggest threat to China's growth is now the environment. One Sam's Club, part of Wal-Mart, in the Chinese city of Shenzhen sold 1,100 air-conditioners in one hot weekend last year. There is a limit to how long you can do that. China's leaders know this and have been taking steps to reverse deforestation and find alternatives to the coal-powered electricity plants that have turned cities like Shenzhen into just one big gray cloud.One thing the Chinese government is doing is changing how local, state and national officials are judged. G.D.P. growth is not the only metric anymore.''During the transition period from planned economy to a market economy, there was a period when the economic indicators were the only criteria, because we had to develop the economy,'' Shanghai's deputy mayor, Feng Guoquin, told me. Today, however, more and more Chinese citizens demand that their local officials ''pay equal attention to economic development and ecological protection.''But given that the legitimacy of the ruling Communist Party rests largely on its ability to keep raising living standards, it can't afford a recession and mass unemployment -- in any crunch, officials will always choose raw growth. The party cannot afford a recession, and it also has to extend growth to the still impoverished rural areas. But many of those villages are already boiling because, while villagers crave jobs, they resent the deforestation, dams and polluted rivers that have already been dumped on them by the big cities.So I'm glad that Donald Rumsfeld finally came over to China to talk with China's military last week, but that is so 20th century. How China uses its growing military is purely hypothetical. What China's impact on the global environment will be if it continues to grow at this pace is a certain disaster -- for China and the world.Tighter regulation alone won't save China's environment, or the world's. Since logging in most natural forests was banned here in 1998, China's appetite for imported wood has led to stripped forests in Russia, Africa, Burma and Brazil. China outsourced its environmental degradation.That is why you need an integrated solution. And that is why the most important strategy the U.S. and China need to pursue, in concert, is one that brings business, government and N.G.O.'s together to produce a more sustainable form of development -- so China can create a model for itself and others on how to do more things with less stuff and fewer emissions. That is the economic, environmental and national security issue of our day. Nothing else is even close.Op-Ed ColumnistI came to Shangri-La and I met the Buddha.Well, not the Buddha, but one of the ''living Buddhas'' designated by the Buddhist hierarchy as spiritual leaders throughout this Tibetan region of China, and not the mythic Shangri-La of ''Lost Horizon,'' but this lush western China countryside near the border with Burma that has renamed itself Shangri-La to attract more tourists.But don't underestimate this Shangri-La. Its spectacular wetlands, pine forests and mountains (this is where your rhododendrons originally came from) make up one of the 34 biodiversity hot spots designated worldwide by Conservation International as places with large numbers of unique plant and animal species threatened by human development -- which, once lost, may never come back.And that's why I came here. Because Shangri-La County is a microcosm of the biggest challenge facing China. Put simply: if development doesn't come to Shangri-La and other rural areas, the divide between haves and have-nots will widen and destabilize China. But if the wrong development comes here, it will add to global warming and ravage the rural environment where many of China's indigenous cultures and species are nested.Yes, China must get its smoke-belching factories out of the coastal cities because they are making the cities unlivable, but if it just pushes them into the countryside, they will destroy way too much of China's farmland, and the natural areas that are the home of things like Tibetan culture.The living Buddha, Ang Weng, is right in the middle of this drama, trying to promote a higher living standard for his people -- without destroying the ''sacred forests'' essential to Tibetan spirituality. The living Buddha wears a sunny smile and a cowboy hat. His wife, who makes a mean butter tea, a traditional Tibetan drink, translated from his Tibetan dialect into Chinese for my translator.He got right to the point: ''The human brain is moving much faster into the modern world than the environment, and this fast move is having an impact on the environment. Build this and build that, and you lose the environment.''The good, and surprising, news I found in Shangri-La was how much the poor villagers here were coming up with their own green growth solutions. For instance, the 39 families in the village of Hamugu have bundled their savings to build a lodge for ecotourists drawn by the wetlands. ''We just need a Web site,'' the manager told me. A local botanist has built Shangri-La Alpine Botanic Garden, which employs two dozen people and shares profits with the local village.It also has the finest public toilet I've ever used, a solar-powered composting toilet with an automated plastic green seat cover -- in the middle of nowhere! It was labeled ''The Lavatory of Environmental Protection of the Travel.''A U.S. multinational, 3M, is financing the restoration of the local forests to reduce climate change and protect the watersheds. And the old log-and-mud town of Zhongdian here is a Disneyland-like traditional Tibetan village, with hot-pot restaurants that attract droves of Chinese tourists.''All the basic elements of a network solution to safeguard environment and culture are here,'' said Lu Zhi, Conservation International's director in China and my traveling companion. (My wife's a C.I. board member.) ''But the challenge is how do you organize this business-N.G.O.-government network more effectively so you can provide ecofriendly alternatives to industrial development that could be replicated in the rest of rural China.''Not only would this be enormously important for China's environment, but it could also be a model for other developing countries. What we don't want is for China to protect its own environment and then strip everyone else's in the developing world by importing their forests and minerals.''For 30 years, the business of development has been Americans and Europeans lecturing poor countries about how they need to do things differently,'' said Glenn Prickett, a senior vice president with Conservation International. ''What we hope to see here is a new paradigm, where China, itself a developing country, offers a new model of sustainable development to other developing countries.''I sure hope so. We all need China to start assuming an environmental leadership role commensurate with its impact on the world. Imagine a day when China is sharing its own approaches to environmentally and culturally sustainable development with other developing countries -- not just pursuing them for its resources.Now that would be a great leap forward.Op-Ed ColumnistThere are only about 60 gold-standard green buildings in the world -- that is, buildings certified by the U.S. Green Building Council as having been made with the materials and systems that best reduce waste, emissions and energy use. One of those buildings is in Beijing -- China's Ministry of Science and Technology, at 55 Yuyuantan Nanlu Street.I toured it the other day with Robert Watson from the Natural Resources Defense Council, who advised China in designing the building. What struck me most was how much stuff in China's greenest building was labeled ''Made in China.''Get used to it. In China, conservation is not a ''personal virtue,'' as Dick Cheney would say. Today it is a necessity. It was so polluted in Beijing the other day you could not make out buildings six blocks away. That's the bad news. Here's the good news: China's leaders and business community know it. They know that as China grows more prosperous, and more Chinese buy homes and cars, it must urgently adopt green technologies; otherwise, it will destroy its environment and its people. Green technology will decide whether China continues on its current growth path or chokes itself to death. So green innovation is starting to mushroom in China.And what's the U.S. doing as green technology is emerging as the most important industry of the 21st century? Let's see: the Bush team is telling our manufacturers they don't have to improve auto mileage standards or appliance efficiency, is looking to ease regulations on oil refiners and is rejecting a gas tax that would help shift America to hybrid vehicles.We should be doing just the opposite: creating more pressures and incentives so our companies will innovate and dominate the next great industry. You think China is cleaning our clock now with cheap clothing? Wait a decade, when we'll have to import our green technology from Beijing, just as we have to import hybrid motors today from Japan.Green China will be much more challenging than Red China. Look around the nine-story Ministry of Science and Technology building. Yes, a lot of cool things here are from Europe, and some are from the U.S.But what about the porous pavement bricks, made of fly ash, a byproduct of coal combustion that allows storm water to flow through and be reabsorbed into the Beijing aquifer? Made in China. The photovoltaic panels that provide 10 percent of the building's electricity from sunlight? Made in China. The solar hot water system? Made in China. The soil substitute in the building's roof garden that is 75 percent lighter than regular dirt and holds three to four times more water per cubic foot? Made in China. The concrete building blocks filled with insulating foam that keeps you warmer in the winter and cooler in the summer? Made in China, by a U.S.-owned company. The water-free urinals? Made for the China market by a U.S.-owned company.Jack Perkowski, who runs Asimco Technologies, the huge China-based auto parts maker, told me where this is heading: ''As China moves from the second-largest market to the first in autos  the industry here will have to come up with transport that is more affordable, fuel-efficient and environmentally sound.''As green technologies get adopted here and gain scale -- Mr. Perkowski cited a Chinese auto company now rushing to develop a green diesel engine for passenger cars -- the Chinese will set the standards for the world.''So they will become technology exporters rather than importers,'' he said. And because of the unique needs of China and the fact that it will become the biggest market for any product, the Chinese will ''innovate at their affordability level.'' Once they come up with low-cost solutions that work inside China, they will take them global at China prices.The China Daily reported that China's 11th five-year plan, which starts soon, includes a program to sharply reduce China's energy usage per unit of G.D.P. by 2010. ''To hit the target, a huge business potential will be open to investors,'' Zhou Dadi, director of China's top energy research institute, told a forum held by the paper.''China is growing three times as fast as we are,'' Mr. Watson said, ''[so] a lot of innovation is going to happen here, and once it is introduced [on the low-cost China platform] it is going to spread a lot faster.  We are not the only source of innovation on the planet. The Japanese and Europeans are here in a big way, and they are giving their stuff away.''We deserve to lose. We are clutching our past with these tremulous hands, and everyone else is vigorously grasping the future.''Op-Ed ColumnistThere is a techie adage that goes like this: In China or Japan the nail that stands up gets hammered, while in Silicon Valley the nail that stands up drives a Ferrari and has stock options. Underlying that adage is a certain American confidence that whatever we lack in preparing our kids with strong fundamentals in math and science, we make up for by encouraging our best students to be independent, creative thinkers.There is a lot of truth to that. Even the Chinese will tell you that they've been good at making the next new thing, and copying the next new thing, but not imagining the next new thing. That may be about to change. Confident that its best K-12 students will usually outperform America's in math and science, China is focusing on how to transform its classrooms so students become more innovative.''Although we are enjoying a very fast growth of our economy, we own very little intellectual property,'' Wu Qidi, China's vice minister of education, told me. ''We are so proud of China's four great inventions [in the past]: the compass, paper-making, printing and gunpowder. But in the following centuries we did not keep up that pace of invention. Those inventions fully prove what the Chinese people are capable of doing -- so why not now? We need to get back to that nature.'' Nurturing more ''creative thinking and entrepreneurship are the exact issues we are putting attention to today.'' But this bumps head-on against Chinese culture and politics, which still emphasize conformity.But for how much longer? Check out Microsoft Research Asia, the research center Bill Gates set up in Beijing to draw on Chinese brainpower. In 1998, Microsoft gave IQ tests to some 2,000 top Chinese engineers and scientists and hired 20. Today it has 200 full-time Chinese researchers. Harry Shum, a Carnegie Mellon-trained computer engineer who runs the lab, has a very clear view of what Chinese innovators can do, given the right environment. The Siggraph convention is the premier global conference for computer graphics and interactive technologies. At Siggraph 2005, 98 papers were published from research institutes all over the world.Nine of them -- almost 10 percent -- came from Microsoft's Chinese research center, beating out M.I.T. and Stanford. Dr. Shum said: ''In 1999 we had one paper published. In 2000, we had one. In 2001, we had two. In 2002, we had four. In 2003 we had three. In 2004, we had five, and this year we are very lucky to have nine.'' Do you see a pattern?In addition, Microsoft Beijing has contributed more than 100 new technologies for current Microsoft products -- from the Xbox to Windows. That's a huge leap in seven years, although, outside the hothouses like Microsoft, China still has a way to go.Dr. Shum said: ''A Chinese journalist once asked me, 'Harry, tell me honestly, what is the difference between China and the U.S.? How far is China behind?' I joked, 'Well, you know, the difference between China high-tech and American high-tech is only three months -- if you don't count creativity.' When I was a student in China 20 years ago, we didn't even know what was happening in the U.S. Now, anytime an M.I.T. guy puts up something on the Internet, students in China can absorb it in three months.''But could someone here create it? That is a whole other issue. I learned mostly about how to do research right at Carnegie Mellon.  Before you create anything new, you need to understand what is already there. Once you have this foundation, being creative can be trainable. China is building that foundation. So very soon, in 10 or 20 years, you will see a flood of top-quality research papers from China.''Once more original ideas emerge, though, China will need more venture capital and the rule of law to get them to market. ''Some aspects of Chinese culture did not encourage independent thinking,'' Dr. Shum said. ''But with venture capital coming into this country, it will definitely inspire a new generation of Chinese entrepreneurs. I will be teaching a class at Tsinghua University next year on how to do technology-based ventures.  You have technology in Chinese universities, but people don't know what to do with it -- how to marketize it.''A few of his young Chinese inventors demonstrated their new products for me. I noticed that several of them had little granite trophies lined up on their shelves. I asked one of them, who had seven or eight blocks on her shelf, ''What are those?'' She said the researchers got them from Microsoft every time they invented something that got patented.How do you say ''Ferrari'' in Chinese?Op-Ed ContributorMy friend Nayan Chanda, the editor of YaleGlobal magazine and a longtime reporter in Asia, recently shared with me a conversation he'd had with an Asian diplomat regarding India and China: India, he said, always looks as if it is boiling on the surface, but underneath it is very stable because of a 50-year-old democratic foundation. China looks very stable on the surface, but underneath it is actually boiling -- an overheated economy under a tightly sealed political lid.There is a lot to that, but what's most interesting is where China is boiling today. Ever since the student uprising in 1989, we in America have tended to look at China through the prism of Tiananmen, thinking that the main drama there is a struggle pitting freedom-seeking students and intellectuals against a hard-line Communist Party. There is still truth in that perspective, but it is not the most revealing lens through which to look at China anymore. A lot of those Tiananmen students have gotten M.B.A.'s, dropped out of politics and gone to work for multinationals.Today, the most relevant fault line in China is Tiger Leaping Gorge, a spectacular geological site in Western China along the Yangtze River, and one of the deepest gorges in the world. With its thunderous rushing waters cutting through mountains, it is certainly one of the most beautiful I have ever seen. I visited there with my camera, but I also visited with some local villagers with my notebook.These farmers are angry that plans are being made to dam the Yangtze River, flood Tiger Leaping Gorge and force the relocation of thousands of farmers and villagers. And they are getting vocal, learning about their legal options and pressing local officials to reconsider how the dam will be built. Getting political is not a hobby for these farmers. It is a necessity.And similar dramas of necessity are being played out all over the Chinese countryside today by villagers who know that they are not fully participating in China's economic growth, but are being told that if they want to, they must accept dams or factories that will destroy their environment.They don't like this deal, but China's rigid political system leaves these farmers, who are still the majority in China today, with few legal options for fighting it. That helps explain why China's official media reported that in 1993 some 10,000 incidents of social unrest took place in China. Last year there were 74,000.This is the political lens to watch China through today. How China's ruling Communist Party manages the environmental, social, economic and political tensions converging on such places as Tiger Leaping Gorge -- not Tiananmen Square -- will be the most important story determining China's near-term political stability.Listen to China's deputy minister of the environment, Pan Yue, in his stunning March 7 interview with Der Spiegel: ''Our raw materials are scarce, we don't have enough land, and our population is constantly growing. Currently, there are 1.3 billion people living in China; that's twice as many as 50 years ago. In 2020, there will be 1.5 billion people in China. Cities are growing, but desert areas are expanding at the same time; habitable and usable land has been halved over the past 50 years.  [China's G.D.P. miracle] will end soon because the environment can no longer keep pace.  Half of the water in our seven largest rivers is completely useless.  One-third of the urban population is breathing polluted air.''We are convinced that a prospering economy automatically goes hand in hand with political stability. And I think that's a major blunder.  If the gap between the poor and the rich widens, then regions within China and the society as a whole will become unstable. If our democracy and our legal system lag behind the overall economic development, various groups in the population won't be able to protect their own interests.''The drama of Tiger Leaping Gorge is not as easy to follow as a single man standing in front of a tank in Tiananmen. It involves the complex interactions among the Chinese countryside, the N.G.O.'s and local organizations working there, the developers looking to build there, and a still heavy-handed Communist Party.But somewhere in this swirl of forces is where China's future stability is going to be shaped -- or not. No wonder China's leaders have made building a ''harmonious society'' central to their next five-year plan. Wish them well, because how they do will affect everything from the air you breathe to the clothes you wear and the interest on your mortgage.Op-Ed Columnist Maureen Dowd is on a book tour.Dear God in Heaven: Forgive me my sins, for I have been to China and I have had bad thoughts. Forgive me, Heavenly Father, for I have cast an envious eye on the authoritarian Chinese political system, where leaders can, and do, just order that problems be solved. For instance, Shanghai's deputy mayor told me that as his city became more polluted, the government simply moved thousands of small manufacturers out of Shanghai to clean up the air.Forgive me, Heavenly Father, because I know that China's political system is hardly ideal -- not even close -- and is not one that I would ever want to emulate in my own country. But at this time, when democracies, like India and America, seem incapable of making hard decisions, I cannot help but feel a tinge of jealousy at China's ability to be serious about its problems and actually do things that are tough and require taking things away from people. Dear Lord, please accept my expression of remorse for harboring such feelings. Amen.Well, you get the point. At a time when we are busy lecturing others about the need to adopt democratic systems, ours and many others seem to be hopelessly gridlocked -- with neither the left nor the right able to generate a mandate to tackle hard problems. And it is the yawning gap between the huge problems our country faces today -- Social Security reform, health care, education, climate change, energy -- and the tiny, fragile mandates that our democracy seems able to generate to address these problems that is really worrying.Why is this happening? Clearly, the way voting districts have been gerrymandered in America, thanks to the Voting Rights Act and Tom DeLay-like political manipulations, is a big part of the problem. As a result of this gerrymandering, only a small fraction of the seats in the U.S. Congress and state legislatures are really contested anymore. Therefore, few candidates have to build cross-party coalitions around the middle.Most seats are now reserved for one party or the other. And when that happens, it means that in each of these districts the real election is the primary, where Democrats run against Democrats and Republicans against Republicans. And when that happens, it produces candidates who appeal only to their party's base -- so we end up with a Congress paralyzed between the far left and far right.Add to this the fragmentation of the media, with the rising power of bloggers and podcasters, and the decline in authority of traditional centrist institutions -- including this newspaper -- and you have what the Foreign Policy magazine editor Moisés Naím rightly calls ''the age of diffusion.''''Show me a democratically elected government today anywhere in the world with a popular mandate rooted in a landslide victory -- there aren't many,'' said Mr. Naím, whose smart new book, ''Illicit,'' is an absolute must-read about how small illicit players, using the tools of globalization, are now able to act very big on the world stage, weakening nations and the power of executives across the globe. ''Everywhere you look in this age of diffusion, you see these veto centers emerging, which can derail, contain or stop any initiative. That is why so few governments today are able to generate a strong unifying mandate.''This is a real dilemma because a vast majority of Americans are just center-left or center-right. Many surely feel disenfranchised by today's far-left, far-right Congress. Moreover, the solutions to our biggest problems -- especially Social Security and health care -- can be found only in compromises between the center-left and center-right. This is doubly true today, when the real solutions require Washington to take stuff away from people, not give them more.But our politics no longer rewards good behavior. Ronald Reagan, the most overrated president in U.S. history, lowered taxes and raised government spending, triggering a huge spike in the deficit. But because he did it with a sunny smile and it happened to coincide with the decline of the Soviet Union, he is remembered as a Great Man. The senior George Bush raised taxes and helped pave the way for the prosperity of the 1990's. He also managed the actual collapse of the Soviet Union without a shot being fired, using unsmiling but deft diplomacy. Yet the elder Bush is somehow remembered -- including, it seems, by his own son -- as a failed president.Add it all up and you can see that we have put ourselves in a position where only a total blow-out crisis in our system will generate enough authority for a democratic government to do the right things.Let us pray.Op-Ed ColumnistWe've been so bombarded with news of terrorism lately that we don't even notice anymore when a fundamental line has been crossed. The period of the last few weeks has been one of those times. At the start of the Muslim holy month, Ramadan, a Sunni Muslim suicide bomber walked into a mosque in Hilla, Iraq, and blew himself up in the middle of a funeral. Just after the close of Ramadan, a Sunni Muslim suicide bomber walked into the Radisson SAS Hotel in Amman, Jordan, and blew himself up in the middle of a wedding reception.Terrorists willing to blow themselves up at funerals and weddings of their own faith are individuals who have become completely disconnected from humanity. They feel no moral restraints. And this is the real problem in the Sunni Muslim world today: there is no controlling moral authority. Any event can be a target: funerals, weddings, anything. Maybe next week the jihadists will blow up a maternity ward.Yes, there is a civil war going on in the Sunni Muslim world today, a civil war between jihadist fundamentalists on one side and a generally moderate majority on the other. There's just one problem -- only one side is really fighting this civil war: the jihadists.The Sunni Muslim majority has been largely passive. Oh, yes, the Sunni Arab regimes arrest these jihadists when they can, but the Sunni regimes and the religious establishments they control rarely attack the underlying intolerant Islamist ideas these jihadists propagate, namely that Christians, Jews, Shiites and Hindus are inferior to Sunni Muslims and can be attacked. How many fatwas -- religious edicts -- have been issued condemning the Jordanian terrorist Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, who has already murdered hundreds of Shiite Muslims and others? Not many.It was heartening to see Jordanians take to the streets to condemn the triple suicide bombings in their capital by the Zarqawi terrorists. That's rare. And King Abdullah of Jordan has been one of the few Arab leaders actually willing to take on the jihadists on the ideological and religious level, sponsoring an intra-Muslim dialogue for just that purpose. But it was dispiriting to listen to other Jordanian and Arab voices saying Israelis were behind the attacks in Amman, or telling the bombers: if you want to bomb someone, bomb the ''occupiers'' -- code for Americans and Israelis. Why us?But here's the protest call the world needs to hear from the Sunni Arab street: ''Why anyone?''Suicide bombing is an abomination. It is sick. You cannot build a healthy state from suicide bombers. Imagine what your national museum would look like: ''Here's Ahmed -- he blew up 52 Muslims at a wedding.'' ''Here's Muhammad -- he blew up 25 Shiites at a funeral.''So why don't more people in the Sunni world speak out against the Sunni Arabs doing this? In part, it's because feelings of powerlessness and humiliation are rife in Sunni Arab society, so there is some grudging respect for suicide bombers who are ready to give their lives to resist outsiders or the authoritarian regimes that Arabs blame for keeping them down.It's also because the Sunni silent majority isn't all that upset when suicide bombers blow up Jews, Christians or Shiite civilians. The Saudi press often extols such suicide bombers as ''martyrs'' or ''the resistance.''Since their societies tolerated such barbarism against civilians when it was used against others, the Sunni terrorists apparently figured it was just fine to use such tactics against their Sunni foes, too. I am sure Zarqawi is mystified today by the protests against him in Jordan. He must be asking, What's the fuss? After all, no one protested recently when Muslim suicide bombers butchered Shiites in Iraq or Ahmedis in Pakistan or Christian tourists in Indonesia or Jews in Israel or Hindus in New Delhi.The Sunni world would do well to reread the famous words by the Rev. Martin Niemöller, a German pastor imprisoned in World War II: ''First they came for the Communists, and I didn't speak up because I wasn't a Communist. Then they came for the Jews, and I didn't speak up because I wasn't a Jew. Then they came for the Catholics, and I didn't speak up because I was a Protestant. Then they came for me, and by that time there was no one left to speak up for me.''A civilization that does not delegitimize suicide bombing against any innocent civilian is itself committing suicide. And that is exactly what the Sunni Muslim world is doing when it does not consistently teach its children that suicide bombing against civilians is always wrong -- and that all who engage in it do not go to heaven, but straight to hell.Maureen Dowd is on a book leave.Op-Ed ColumnistIn October 2000, as the second Palestinian intifada was exploding, I was visiting Jerusalem and arrived at the King David Hotel late at night. As I wrote at the time, the place was utterly deserted. The lobby lights were out. The clerk was sleeping on a couch, and I was reduced to shouting into the darkness in one of the world's great hotels: ''Hello. Is anybody home?'' The hotel's owner joked back then that the violence had so damaged his hotel business that ''we're stealing towels from our guests.''Well, what a difference a cease-fire makes. In the wake of Yasir Arafat's death, the election of Mahmoud Abbas as his successor and the Israeli pullout from Gaza, Jerusalem hotels are again packed. I couldn't help but notice on a stroll around Jerusalem that the famous Cafe Hillel, which I had last visited an hour after it had been blown up by a suicide bomber in September 2003, was beautifully rebuilt.Where am I going with this? I've always said that in the Middle East, hope is a weed. Give it just a drop of water, a tiny opening and a splash of sunshine, and it will sprout through any crack in the rubble of war.The best sign of that is the surprise election of Amir Peretz to head Israel's Labor Party. He beat the longtime Labor leader Shimon Peres (a good man) in a party vote last week. Amir Peretz is no weed, but his ability to suddenly sprout up at this time tells you a lot about the mood of cautious optimism here.Why? Because Amir Peretz is a Moroccan-born Jew in a country that has never elected a non-European Jew as prime minister, even though Jews from Arab, Muslim and Asian lands make up half of Israel. Because Mr. Peretz rose inside the Labor Party not by commanding troops in war or holding a big national security job -- the career path of previous prime ministers -- but by commanding workers on strike as head of the country's biggest labor federation. Because Mr. Peretz is an unabashed land-for-peace dove at a time when the country is being led by its biggest hawk, Ariel Sharon. And finally, because Mr. Peretz is a modern social democrat, with real socialist roots in an age when the rock stars of Israel are its young, rich high-tech stars, and even the Labor Party is dominated by liberal business executives.As a former Likud minister, Dan Meridor, said to me, ''If the Labor Party were to actually represent the workers again -- that would be a revolution!''Such an anti-establishment politician could only emerge, and have a chance to win the prime ministership (new elections were announced yesterday for sometime before the end of March), at a time when Israelis feel they can relax a little bit and focus much more on work than war.And there is a lot to focus on, said Sever Plocker, Yediot's top economics writer: ''Israel is one of the most unequal societies in the world. Twenty-five percent of Israelis live below the poverty line -- one-third of all Israeli children. We have the highest rate of poverty among people 65 and older in the Western world. Those are terrible numbers.''Many of the business elites within Labor, Mr. Plocker said, are ready to back Mr. Peretz because they know that ''capitalism in Israel has lost its human face'' and that if something is not done about that, Israel ''is heading for a social explosion.''No sooner was Mr. Peretz elected head of Labor than Prime Minister Sharon started talking about poverty. Mr. Sharon knows that an Oriental Jew, running on poverty and social issues, could cut deep into his traditional constituency -- under the right conditions.And that is the question: Will the right conditions prevail for Mr. Peretz to actually win? The deal just brokered by Condoleezza Rice that will open Gaza's borders to the world for trade and labor is really the key. If this deal proceeds, and Gaza is open, it has a chance to become more like Dubai and less like Mogadishu.If that happens, and only if that happens, the peace process will move forward toward a two-state solution, including the West Bank. And the more that is resolved, the more likely it is that Israelis will consider voting -- for the first time -- for a social democrat rather than a security hawk. ''That would constitute one of the most important earthquakes ever in Israeli politics,'' said the Israeli political theorist Yaron Ezrahi.And the more that happens, the more tourists will go to Israel and steal the hotel towels -- and not the other way around. Beware, though. Betting on such prolonged calm is never a good bet here. I'd still bring an extra towel when you come -- just in case.Op-Ed ColumnistPresident George W. Bush has just entered his third term. That's right. He's a three-term president. His first term was from 2001 to 2004, and it was dominated by 9/11, which Mr. Bush skillfully used to take a hard-right Republican agenda on taxes and war with Iraq, which was going nowhere on 9/10, and drive it into a 9/12 world.His second term was very brief. It lasted from his re-election in November 2004 until Election Day 2005. This was an utterly wasted term. It was dominated by an attempt to privatize Social Security, which the country rejected, political scandals involving I. Lewis Libby Jr., Tom DeLay and Bill Frist, a ham-fisted response to Katrina and a mishandling of the Iraq war to such a degree that many Democrats and Republicans have begun to vote ''no confidence'' in the Bush-Cheney war performance. If ours were a parliamentary system, Mr. Bush would have had to resign by now.So now begins Mr. Bush's third term. What will he do with it? The last time Mr. Bush hit rock bottom -- then from too much drinking -- he found God and turned his life around. Now that he has hit rock bottom again -- this time from drinking in too much Karl Rove -- the question is whether he can find America and turn his presidency around.When I watch Mr. Bush these days, though, he looks to me like a man who wishes that we had a 28th amendment to the Constitution -- called ''Can I Go Now?'' He looks like someone who would prefer to pack up and go back to his Texas ranch. It's not just that he doesn't seem to be having any fun. It's that he seems to be totally out of ideas relevant to the nation's future.Since there is no such clause, Mr. Bush has two choices. One is to continue governing as though he's still running against John McCain in South Carolina. That means pushing a hard-right strategy based on dividing the country to get the 50.1 percent he needs to push through more tax cuts, while ignoring our real problems: the deficit, health care, energy, climate change and Iraq. More slash-and-burn politics like that will be a disaster.Indeed, at a time when a decent outcome in Iraq is still possible and we are at the most important political moment in Baghdad -- the first national election based on an Iraqi-written constitution -- it was appalling to watch Mr. Bush and Dick Cheney using their bully pulpits to act like two Rove attack dogs, accusing Democrats of being less than patriotic on Iraq.For two men who have fought this war without deploying enough troops, always putting politics before policy, without any plans for the morning after and never punishing any member of their team for rank incompetence to then accuse others of lacking seriousness on Iraq is disgusting. Yes, we need to stay the course for now in Iraq, but we can't stay the course alone or divided. That's the point.We are about to produce the most legitimate government ever in the Arab world, and the Bush-Cheney team -- instead of acknowledging its errors on W.M.D., seeking forgiveness and urging the country to unite behind the important effort to defeat the jihadist madness in Iraq -- does what? It starts slinging mud at Democrats on Iraq. Sure, some Democrats goaded them with reckless remarks -- but they are not in power. Where are the adults? We can't afford this nonsense, while also ignoring our energy crisis, the deficit, health care, climate change and Social Security.''We are entering the era of hard choices for the United States -- an era in which we can't always count on three Asian countries writing us checks to compensate for our failure to prepare for a hurricane or properly conduct a war,'' said David Rothkopf, author of ''Running the World: The Inside Story of the National Security Council and the Architects of American Power.''''If President Bush doesn't rise to this challenge, our children and grandchildren will look at the burden he has placed on their shoulders and see this moment as the hinge between the American Century and the Chinese Century. George W. Bush may well be seen as the president who, by refusing to address these urgent questions when they needed to be addressed, invited America's decline.''Truly, I hope Mr. Bush rises to the challenge. We do not have three years to waste. To do that, though, Mr. Bush would need to become a very different third-term president, with a much more centrist agenda and style. If he does, he still has time to be a bridge to the future. If he doesn't, the resources he will have squandered and the size of the problems he will have ignored will put him in the running for one of our worst presidents ever.Op-Ed Columnist Maureen Dowd is on a book tour.I would like to propose a ban -- a ban on Bush administration officials measuring our success in Iraq by the number of Iraqi soldiers we have ''trained.'' I propose this ban because it is an utterly misleading metric, and if we become addicted to it we are going to make some even bigger mistakes in Iraq than we already have.The issue is not how many Iraqi soldiers there are in Iraq. The issue is how many Iraqi citizens there are in Iraq. Without more Iraqi citizens, there will never be enough Iraqi soldiers.This incessant Bush babble about training the Iraqi Army is so much wasted breath. After all, who is training the insurgents? Nobody, as far as we know -- yet they have proved to be a smart, adaptable and lethal fighting force. Because in war, motivation always matters more than training. The insurgents know who they are and what they are fighting for. I think who they are is horrendous and what they are fighting for is apartheid -- the right of Iraq's Sunni minority to rule permanently over the country's Shiite and Kurdish majority. But they have the will, and therefore they have the way.The Iraqi Army will be effective only if it has a will to go along with the way we are training it. And the Iraqi Army will have the will to fight only if its soldiers have a government they believe in and are motivated to defend. And that brings us back to citizenship.It is terrific that Iraqis just had another free and fair election and that some 11 million people voted. Americans should be proud that we helped to bring that about in a region that has so rarely experienced any sort of democratic politics.But what's still unclear is this: Who and what were Iraqis voting for? Were they voting for Kurdish sectarian leaders, who they hope will gradually split Kurdistan off from Iraq? Were they voting for pro-Iranian Shiite clerics, who they hope will carve out a Shiite theocratic zone between Basra and Baghdad? Were they voting for Sunni tribal leaders, who they hope will restore the Sunnis to their ''rightful'' place -- ruling everyone else? Or, were they voting for a unified Iraq and for politicians whom they expect to compromise and rewrite the Constitution into a broadly accepted national compact?If they were voting for Iraqi sects, then it means that there are no Iraqi citizens -- only Shiites, Kurds, Sunnis, etc., trapped together inside Iraq's artificial borders. If, however, they were voting for a unified Iraq and Iraqi leaders who will make that happen, we still have a chance for a decent outcome.Because if there are Iraqi citizens, and national leaders, then we have partners for the kind of Iraq we hope to see built. In that case, we must stay the course. If there are no Iraqi citizens, or not enough, then we have no real partners and staying the course will never produce the self-sustaining Iraq we want.President Bush talks about Iraq as if it were a given that there is a single Iraqi aspiration for exactly the kind of pluralistic democracy America would like to see built in Iraq, and that the only variable is whether we stay long enough to see it through. I wish that were so -- our job would be easy. But it is not so. It still is not clear what is the will of the Iraqi people. In the wake of this election, though, we are about to find out.Everything now rides on what kind of majority the Iraqi Shiites want to be and what kind of minority the Sunnis want to be. Will the Shiites prove to be magnanimous in victory and rewrite the Constitution in a way that decent Sunnis, who want to be citizens of a unified Iraq, can accept? Will the Sunnis agree to accept their fair share of Iraq's oil revenue and government posts -- and nothing more?My own visits to Iraq have left me convinced that beneath all the tribalism, there is a sense of Iraqi citizenship and national identity eager to come out. But it will take more security, and many more Iraqi leaders animated by national reconciliation, for it to emerge in a sustained way.Unlike many on the left, I'm not convinced that this will never happen and that all of this has been for naught. Unlike many on the right, I'm not convinced that it will inevitably happen if we just stay the course long enough. The only thing I am certain of is that in the wake of this election, Iraq will be what Iraqis make of it -- and the next six months will tell us a lot. I remain guardedly hopeful.How will you know if things are going well? Easy. The Iraqi Army will suddenly become effective without U.S. guidance. It will know how to fight, because it will know what -- and whom -- it is fighting for.Op-Ed ColumnistI'd like to thank Iran's president, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, for his observation that the Nazi Holocaust against the Jews was just a ''myth.'' You just don't see world leaders expressing themselves so honestly anymore -- not about the Holocaust, but about their own anti-Semitism and the real character of their regimes.But since Iran's president has raised the subject of ''myths,'' why stop with the Holocaust? Let's talk about Iran. Let's start with the myth that Iran is an Islamic ''democracy'' and that Ahmadinejad was democratically elected.Sure he was elected -- after all the Iranian reformers had their newspapers shut down, and parties and candidates were banned by the unelected clerics who really run the show in Tehran. Sorry, Ahmadinejad, they don't serve steak at vegetarian restaurants, they don't allow bikinis at nudist colonies, and they don't call it ''democracy'' when you ban your most popular rivals from running. So you are nothing more than a shah with a turban and a few crooked ballot boxes sprinkled around.And speaking of myths, here's another one: that Iran's clerics have any popularity with the broad cross-section of Iranian youth.This week, Ahmadinejad exposed that myth himself when he banned all Western music on Iran's state radio and TV stations. Whenever a regime has to ban certain music or literature, it means it has lost its hold on its young people. It can't trust them to make the ''right'' judgments on their own. The state must do it for them. If Ahmadinejad's vision for Iran is so compelling, why does he have to ban Beethoven and the Beatles?And before we leave this subject of myths, let me add one more: the myth that anyone would pay a whit of attention to the bigoted slurs of Iran's president if his country were not sitting on a dome of oil and gas. Iran has an energetic and educated population, but the ability of Iranians to innovate and realize their full potential has been stunted ever since the Iranian revolution. Iran's most famous exports today, other than oil, are carpets and pistachios -- the same as they were in 1979, when the clerics took over.Sad. Iran's youth are as talented as young Indians and Chinese, but they have no chance to show it. Iran has been reduced to selling its natural resources to India and China -- so Chinese and Indian youth can invent the future, while Iran's young people are trapped in the past.No wonder Ahmadinejad, like some court jester, tries to distract young Iranians from his failings by bellowing anti-Jewish diatribes and banning rock 'n' roll.What is a fact is the danger someone like Ahmadinejad would pose if his country developed a nuclear weapon. But that is where things are heading. Iran today has so much oil money to sprinkle around Europe, it doesn't worry for a second that the Europeans would ever impose real sanctions on Tehran for refusing to open its nuclear program.''The West has lost its leverage,'' notes Gal Luft, an energy expert at the Institute for the Analysis of Global Security. Europe is addicted to Iran's oil and to Iran's purchases of European goods. At the same time, the Iranian regime has been very clever at petro-diplomacy.After the U.S. invaded Afghanistan and Iraq, ''the Iranians knew they needed an insurance policy,'' Mr. Luft added, ''so they did two things: they concentrated on developing a bomb and went out and struck gas deals with one-third of humanity -- India and China,'' the world's two fastest-growing energy consumers. So it is highly unlikely that China would ever allow the U.N. Security Council to impose sanctions on Iran.The whole world seems to be getting bought off these days by oil. Gerhard Schröder, the former German chancellor, just became chairman of a Russian-German gas pipeline project -- controlled by the Russian government -- that he championed while in office. The man just stepped down as the leader of Germany and now he's working for the Russians! I guess Jack Abramoff was not available.The word from the White House is that President Bush is trying to figure out a theme for his State of the Union speech and for his next three years. Mr. President, what more has to happen -- how many more Katrinas, how much more reckless behavior by Iran, how many more allies bought off by petro-dollars -- before you realize that there is only one thing to do for the next three years: lead America and the world in an all-out push to conserve energy, reduce dependence on oil and develop alternatives?Because three more years of $60-a-barrel oil will undermine everything good in the world that the U.S. wants to do -- and that's no myth.Op-Ed Columnist