verlyn klinkenborg
The most unusual words in Marilynne Robinson's new novel, ''Gilead,'' are probably ''Horeb'' and ''Nishnabotna.'' One is a synonym for the biblical Mount Sinai and the other is the name of a river in southwest Iowa, where the novel is set. I imagine them occurring on a single map--Horeb in Kansas Territory, before the Civil War, the Nishnabotna flowing through the corner of present-day Iowa, and not far away the small town of Gilead, presided over by an old minister named John Ames, who is dying at age 77 in the year 1956.All the other words in ''Gilead'' are as plain as plain can be. It feels as though Marilynne Robinson rounded up the most ordinary words in the English language and herded them into a single corral, where she could sort them and newly dignify them by turning them into the thoughts of this quiet old man.Here is John Ames thinking out loud in a letter to his very young son -- imagining what it will be like to remember this world after dying. ''In eternity this world will be Troy, I believe, and all that has passed here will be the epic of the universe, the ballad they sing in the streets. Because I don't imagine any reality putting this one in the shade entirely, and I think piety forbids me to try.'' It's one thing to bring Troy, a Christian notion of eternity, and the need to write epics and sing street ballads together into a single sentence. As for the whole of this human, earthly reality being put in the shade, to use Ames's wonderful old saying -- well, it's hard to imagine more theology, good sense and day-to-day poetry packed into a simpler phrase.Plain as John Ames's language is, there is nothing threadbare about it. Perhaps the same can be said of where he lives. Like so many small Iowa towns, Gilead, by 1956, was reaching its very humble peak. The ferocity of a militant theology -- the Nazirite prospect of Ames's grandfather, who preached against slavery with a pistol in his belt -- has faded to something much more in keeping with the decorum of ''a dogged little outpost in the sand hills, within striking distance of Kansas.'' Yet it has remained, as well, a dogged little outpost of faith -- a faith that has grown richer and kinder and more tolerant of human frailty even as it has grown more unassuming.It seems to me that ''Gilead'' perfectly captures a note that has been lost in so much recent public discourse about religion in contemporary America -- perhaps because it has become ''public'' discourse.''Gilead'' is made up of the reflections of a man who has devoted his whole life to his church. Sometimes that service means doing a little plumbing for an elderly parishioner. Sometimes it means fending off questions about predestination. Above all it means a steady, quiet wrangling within himself about the certainties he has discovered over the years. John Ames's faith is crowned with doubt, and his doubt is crowned with faith. The radicalism that moved his grandfather has been transmuted into something richer and altogether more human and forgiving.One of the reasons John Ames can look around Gilead with such affection -- this narrow little town where he has lived his entire life -- is because he practices a religion of acceptance. Not the acceptance of one's plight -- a submissive suffering under the hand of circumstance -- but an acceptance of the complexity, the subtlety of human character and human yearning seen in a longer light than any one of us can know. His job, in Gilead, is not to impose the word of God, to bring doctrine down upon the heads of his congregation. It is to listen to the wisdom of the old books -- the Bible; Calvin's Institutes; the works of Karl Barth, John Donne, George Herbert, even Ludwig Feuerbach -- and compare them to what it is possible to know of human nature as it exists in a small town set on the edge of the prairie.And it is also to use the plain language of his neighbors, to show them their own beauty, and the beauty of where they live, in their own tongue. The day comes after a long night, and it is ''one more of the very finite number of days that this old prairie has been called Kansas, or Iowa. But it has all been one day, that first day. Light is constant, we just turn over in it.''You see what I mean. Plain as the sun itself.Editorial ObserverThere's really no counting the roads you never expect to find yourself on. But you know it when you suddenly find yourself on one of them.I came upon such a route a couple of weeks ago in the midst of a cross-country drive: U.S. 84, from Lubbock, Tex., to Clovis, N.M. The fact is that once you're in Lubbock, the odds of ending up on Highway 84 are pretty good. We had planned on cutting across Texas farther north, through Amarillo. But a powerful winter storm -- the one that tied the country in knots that week -- pushed us south from Little Rock, Ark., where the ways divide. Instead of going through Oklahoma City, which was coated in ice, we drove through Texarkana and Dallas and Abilene instead, bound for Santa Fe and points west. Hence, Lubbock.So says the logic of the roads. We got up three mornings in a row, drove all day, and turned up in Lubbock. That city was nowhere in my thoughts when we pulled out of our driveway at home. Yet there we were, and happy to be there after another day spent in the interstate backwash of a wet winter storm. We had glimpsed a patch of blue sky for a moment in central Tennessee, but never once the sun. It was dark when we pulled into Lubbock, late -- on the far western edge of the Central time zone -- and it was dark when we rose the next morning, in the thick of a dense, freezing fog.Lubbock lies at the eastern edge of the Llano Estacado -- the Staked Plains -- one of the strange, dire places in the American imagination. It was trackless once, a nearly featureless, grassy plain between the Canadian River to the north and the Pecos to the west, a place where the very idea of direction seemed to vanish, where every heading seemed equally unpromising. To me it had always been only a beautiful name -- Llano Estacado. Coronado had crossed it in his delusory wanderings, bewildered by its scale. I had filled in the promise of so much bareness, such a flat expanse of grass, with grim imaginings. To me, it was inhabited by wanderers doomed to lose their way and their horses and their lives.The fog was dense, but there was no losing the track out of Lubbock. U.S. 84 angled northwest, and as the sun began to regain its grip it became clear that the settlers of the Llano Estacado had found plenty of water by mining the Ogallala Aquifer beneath it. This is one of the few places in America where you can still find a windmill repair shop. Dark brown cotton fields stretched away from us in every direction, the even terrain broken only by enormous loaves of cotton -- bales the size of semitrailers -- covered with blue tarps. In some fields the bolls still clung to the plants, and now and then a drift of cotton came rolling across the highway like miniature, bleached tumbleweeds.And where the cotton fields ended, there stood enormous dairies, their cattle grazing on smooth, sod-like plains irrigated by prehistoric water from the aquifer below. It was as though the hillside pastures of Vermont had moved westward with the cattle that once grazed them. Despite the expanse of the plains -- perhaps because of them -- the agriculture we saw here was intensive, scaled to a strident immensity, as industrial in its nature as the oil fields farther south near Midland and Odessa.Overnight the trees had taken on a thick coating of ice. The sparse groves around distant farmsteads glowed white in the accumulating light. The trees that leaned over the highway shed their ice in a wintry shadow on the brown pavement. Towns like Sudan and Muleshoe were overshadowed by their cotton gins, by the familiar feel that small farming towns always give off on a cold morning, no matter what the local crop happens to be. Day was rising with some new energy. By the time we got to Muleshoe, the hopes of seeing real sun -- a blue sky, horizon to horizon -- seemed more than just a pipe dream for the first time in nearly 2,000 miles.The wonder of a road like that is plain to me. You can pull onto the shoulder, stop the car, and walk over to feel the cotton bolls or take in the effluvial aroma of the dairies. You can drive up the main street of Clovis and feel the bricks on the roadway rumbling under your tires, or contemplate the enormous Santa Fe sign marking the railroad tracks as you head back to the highway. No matter what you may think of where you are, no matter how you once imagined it, you are implacably there -- not where you used to be, not where you're going, but there. What you see along the way gathers inside you like a dust storm or a haystack or any other metaphor that seems appropriate to this tail end of the high plains.One thought stayed with me all the way west. How odd it is to live at this moment, when crossing the continent is so easily done, when the way across the trackless places is so plainly marked, when a plateau once noted for the scarcity of its water is now being watered from an unimaginably distant past.Editorial ObserverEvery road trip is a narrative of sorts, or at least that's what we like to tell ourselves, in a Kerouac kind of way. But most trips are really nothing of the sort. The long-ago days when a cross-country driver could count on a flat tire to give him a close-up view of the countryside -- when there were no freeways and the way West was along a two-lane highway -- were, well, long ago. Now the narrative, such as it is, is the smooth hum of tires, refueling at automatic, credit-card-reading gas pumps, stopping for the night at motels that do their best to be unvarying coast to coast.You have to drive quite a ways off the Interstate to get to a town that hasn't been distorted by the dark commercial gravity of so much traffic so near at hand. And even then it's hard to find a good place to eat.My wife, Lindy, and I recently drove from our farm north of New York City to California. This trip had a narrative. It was called ''Middlemarch,'' by George Eliot. We slipped the first cassette into the car stereo somewhere near Albany -- ''Miss Brooke had that kind of beauty '' -- and we finished the last one -- ''and rest in unvisited tombs'' -- somewhere between Bakersfield and Fresno. In heavy traffic, or when one of us wanted to sleep, we turned the novel off. The rest of the time we listened. It so happens that America is as wide as ''Middlemarch'' is long, at 70 m.p.h. along the southern route.A novel is really a temporal creation. It is as much about the ways in which time passes in the story and in the reader's awareness of the story as it is about anything else. If you sat in a room and read ''Middlemarch'' or listened to it being read, you would become very aware of the time it took. But for us, the novel became a spatial creation. It was as though we were driving along a pavement of Eliot's sentences laid end to end across the country.Now and then -- Eliot does have occasional longueurs -- we found ourselves working our way up a difficult passage, climbing a switchback from clause to clause. But for the most part it was smooth sailing. It felt, at the best of times, as though the occupants of Middlemarch, that provincial town, were riding with us in the back seat -- Peter Featherstone and Mary Garth and poor Lydgate.I had read ''Middlemarch'' several times before this trip, but I had never heard it. No matter how well you remember a novel you've read, hearing it read aloud is like finding another book within it. I had forgotten how vividly Eliot captures the gossiping life of Middlemarch -- how distinct the voices of even the smallest characters can be as they talk about the coming of the railway or the chances of reform or the troubles of the evangelical Mr. Bulstrode. Lindy and I rode along, cocooned in the voices we were hearing, and it was as if the acoustic space within the car became a psychological space, a place where we could hear Eliot dissect, with a surgeon's grace, the inner mind of Dorothea Brooke.Outside, the trucks roared past, or we roared past the trucks. The Virginia countryside gave way to Tennessee, Arkansas and Texas, and finally New Mexico, Arizona and California. Wooden fences gave way to barbed wire and welded pipe. The landscape was American, of course -- an America adulterated by the effects of I-40. And yet, in a certain sense, we drove from New York to California by way of Loamshire, the fictional county in which ''Middlemarch'' is set. It should have seemed incongruous to be hearing about ''the hayricks at Stone Court'' while looking out at the brush of West Texas, and yet it wasn't. The weather seemed to darken whenever we entered the forbidding territory of Mr. Casaubon's thoughts. It brightened whenever Dorothea appeared, no matter how hard the rain was falling.The human mind has a propensity to give in to the story at hand. We stop reading aloud when the children get to a certain age, and yet there is a craving for the sound of a story that never goes away. Lindy and I tried to imagine a movie of ''Middlemarch'' -- there is a 1994 version with Judi Dench as the voice of George Eliot -- but no visual representation of the story could be as powerful as the story the words themselves deliver -- as powerful as the story those words kindle in us. The greatness of ''Middlemarch'' is that it does not leave us on the surface of its characters, understanding how they feel only from the gestures they make. It takes us deeper inside them than the camera could ever go.I suppose that if adults still read aloud to each other the way they did in centuries past we would get a lot less reading done. I can certainly read ''Middlemarch'' much faster than I can listen to it. But when we got to California, one of the first things I did was borrow a copy from the library. I seemed to recognize every sentence, as if this one were the water tower of a small Tennessee town and that one were a pasture in the oak hills of California.Editorial Observer''I'm playing me.'' That's how Johnny Carson once described the difference between himself and Robert Redford. The actor got to vanish into a part, but the host of the ''Tonight'' show did not -- or so Mr. Carson seemed to be saying. And yet what could be harder than playing oneself?In a way, Johnny Carson, who died Sunday at 79, was as much an apostle of self-invention as anyone who has ever lived in this self-invented country. Night after night he portrayed the version of himself that was defined by the hour and the guests and the cameras -- and by his consciousness of an audience, somewhere out there, that was happy to close its day with his voice and his jokes.Mr. Carson kept up the illusion that he was playing himself all along, even though it was always an illusion. We like to believe that we are very sophisticated viewers nowadays -- thanks to satellite and cable and TiVo and our understanding of the artifices of the medium. But there was something extraordinarily sophisticated -- and we always knew it -- in watching Carson do Carson. It seemed to surprise many people that he could retire as completely as he did after the final broadcast in 1992. But it was surprising only if you believed in the character of the host you saw him playing on the show. He offered just enough of himself to let the audience become comfortable with him. In the end, he shared as much with us as we did with him. He was a performer -- always a performer -- who let us believe that he was our friend, an illusion that audiences cherish. No matter how sophisticated we are, we always love to surrender our defenses and believe what we see.Johnny Carson nearly invented his corner of the business, and, in a certain sense, he also helped reinvent Los Angeles -- or Burbank, at the very least -- for much of middle America. He is said to have welcomed some 22,000 guests onto the show. No matter how relaxed he seemed, there was always a tightness around the eyes, a sense that -- on an off night or with a dull guest -- he might look off into the middle distance. If he had been more candid, more personal, more himself, America would have devoured him quickly. It's a testament to how well he played Johnny Carson that we have not tired of him.VERLYN KLINKENBORGAPPRECIATIONSForty years ago this month, a housewife named Lucille Miller -- just turning 35 -- came to trial in San Bernardino for the murder of her husband, a dentist who was named Gordon Miller and called Cork. The murder was a clumsy one. Cork Miller burned to death in the back seat of a 1964 Volkswagen. According to the district attorney, Lucille Miller intended to make it look as if the car had rolled over an embankment and burst into flames. She would have had time in that deserted neighborhood to get home before the accident was reported. Instead, the car got stuck in the sand in low gear, and burst into flames anyway.The trial was a sensation, and not only because Lucille Miller was pregnant when it began. It was also a trial of the pretensions of the ''New California,'' out at the edge of the subdivision frontier.And so it remains. All the local papers covered the case, as did Joan Didion, who wrote about it in one of the great essays of the 20th century, ''Some Dreamers of the Golden Dream.'' It is an essay of almost biblical wrath and dispassion. Behind its keening rhythms and daylight horrors lies Ms. Didion's sense that this new California, perpetually subdividing, perpetually suckering its dreamers, is guilty of a kind of misprision that she, a native Californian, refuses to share. The essay is often misread as an indictment of Lucille Miller. It is not. It is an indictment of a false promise, the ''revolving credit and dreams about bigger houses, better streets,'' the cascading of debt and adultery and sedatives and lies behind a facade of religious, socially ambitious respectability.Ms. Didion begins with an almost tidal surge that condenses the history of the San Bernardino Valley into its debris, circa 1965, and its strange jumble of naïve beliefs: in Tijuana divorces, in biblical literalism, in the false glamour of the movies. Then comes the line that propels the story forward to the very end: ''Imagine Banyan Street first, because Banyan is where it happened.'' A short trip from San Bernardino down Route 66 and the reader is suddenly thrust onto the scene of the crime, caught in a tangle of lush, green foliage with the mountains towering overhead.As it happens, I am living, for a few months, only a few miles away. It came as a surprise to realize that. Driving to Banyan Street would have seemed to me once about as likely as driving to Oz, if only because Ms. Didion's prose places the street in some mythic territory.But the other morning -- a cool, wet dawn with the sun just passing between the horizon and the rim of clouds in the east -- I drove out Foothill Boulevard (Route 66) into Rancho Cucamonga, turned up Vineyard Avenue, which becomes Carnelian Street, and onto Banyan. The landmarks that guided Ms. Didion -- like the Kapu Kai Restaurant at what was then the corner of Carnelian and Foothill -- are long since gone. But that older California was never meant to be permanent. It was meant to be succeeded by something newer, better, always more upscale.When Ms. Didion saw it, Banyan Street was almost the edge of beyond, past the ''faded bungalows of the people who grow a few grapes and keep a few chickens out here.'' It was a gravel road lined with eucalyptus and lemon groves. Ms. Didion saw something sinister in the clash between the dusty exfoliations of the eucalyptus and the ''unsettlingly glossy'' lemon leaves. A few hundred yards from the corner of Banyan and Sapphire, at the edge of an embankment that no longer exists, Lucille Miller killed her husband.There is, of course, no trace of the crime any longer. Nor is there any trace of the lemon groves. They have vanished as surely as a Saturday Evening Post that would publish an essay like Joan Didion's. I knew what I would find, of course. It is what you find everywhere in this state: an almost unlimited expansion of the new California that Lucille Miller hoped to invent for herself after she collected the double-indemnity insurance benefit from her husband's ''accidental'' death. The houses on Banyan Street are far bigger than she would have imagined, though the lots are smaller. There is only one grove left -- an orange grove -- and it is a quarter acre at most. The trees are heavy with fruit, but no one seems to harvest the oranges.Banyan Street is now as orderly as orderly can be. There is not a chicken or a grape in sight, and for all I know there is not a murderous spouse to be found. The houses slope away down the long alluvial hill, toward the Foothill Freeway and the valley beyond. The street is lined with trash containers standing at attention along the curbs.I drove farther up Carnelian to find the street where Louise and Cork Miller lived in 1965. It's called Bella Vista, up near the top of Carnelian. The address was 8488.Ms. Didion quotes a street sign in her essay: PRIVATE ROAD BELLA VISTA DEAD END. Bella Vista is still private and well marked, carefully warning horseback riders and drivers that this is private property, even though Bella Vista is indistinguishable from the public streets around it. In the recent rains, a tributary of Cucamonga Creek has nearly washed out the pavement in the middle of the block, and the dead end is caused by the gash of an even larger tributary -- 8488 would have stood hard against that narrow wash. Nothing is there now but a vacant lot. If you were to walk up that lot, you would be able to see the eastern rim of the mountains against the sun and the morning haze over the whole of the San Bernardino Valley.The privacy of Bella Vista still feels strangely threatening, even 40 years later, and yet, as the game of privacy is played in California these days, Bella Vista is strictly an amateur. At the top of Carnelian, I came upon what you come upon at the top of nearly any road in California: a walled and gated ''estate'' full of houses, as carefully divided from the rest of Rancho Cucamonga as if they were overlooking Lima or Mexico City. ''Time past,'' Ms. Didion writes, ''is not believed to have any bearing upon time present or future, out in the golden land.'' Maybe not, but the residents high in their compounds -- at a peak well beyond Lucille Miller's poor ambitions -- are taking no chances.Editorial ObserverLast week, the United States Mint released a new nickel, the third in its Westward Journey series. On the obverse is a portrait of Thomas Jefferson, who seems to loom into the porthole of the coin. The word ''Liberty'' appears in a facsimile of Jefferson's handwriting and is dwarfed by ''In God We Trust.'' On the reverse, a bison stands on a small patch of prairie, fenced in by the words ''United States of America,'' which nearly surround him. It is perhaps a meaningless artifact of design that this bison is facing to the right.The new buffalo nickel is, of course, meant to recall the old buffalo nickel, which was minted in Philadelphia, Denver and San Francisco between 1913 and 1938. That nickel was one of the most attractive coins ever issued in this country. A stern, almost oversized profile of an Indian chief appeared on the obverse -- the most lifelike portrait of a Native American ever to appear on United States coinage. The bison on the reverse was not as naturalistic as the one that appears on the new nickel, but he was far more dominant. The coin can barely contain the creature. His head seems to be bowed to fit within the curvature of the rim, and you can almost sense a breadth of prairie lying beyond him. He faces left, and he could, if he wanted, graze his way out from under the words ''United States of America,'' which arc over his back.The mint distributed more than 1.2 billion of those nickels, and they have nearly all been retired. But even in the early 1960's, you could still find a buffalo nickel in your change from time to time. It was always an occasion to stop and look closely. This was a coin that worked in a purely iconographic fashion. It had a visual economy that is still moving. In the face of that Indian and the somber mass of that bison, you can visualize the tragic undertone of American history. To come upon a buffalo nickel -- one of the old ones -- in your pocket was to come upon a work of art.VERLYN KLINKENBORGAPPRECIATIONSEver since I got to Southern California, people have been reminding me that this part of the world has its seasons, too. I always agree. I can think of at least four seasons in Los Angeles: rain, fire, escrow and the Academy Awards. Some years the rainy season comes and goes without attracting much attention to itself, but not this year. There's something a little redundant in being told, in the midst of another downpour, that Los Angeles does indeed have seasons. It almost sounds like complaining.There's an old Midwestern guilt in that need to account for the seasons here. I think of all the Iowa families who moved to California about the same time my family did, in the mid-1960's. For most of them in that first generation, lying in the sun -- just lying there! -- seemed an unaccountable waste of time. They could barely allow themselves the pleasure of eating outdoors without fussing over the pleasure of eating outdoors.Telling the ones who stayed in the Midwest that there are seasons here, too, was a kind of cultural negotiation, a way of saying, ''We're not all that different just because we live in California and dine on artichokes now.'' The fact that the growing season is 365 days long felt like a plenary indulgence, even if you were a Methodist.Any place with as many climates -- or as much climate, allowing the word its salutary overtones -- as Southern California doesn't really need seasons. To drive from San Juan Capistrano over the Santa Ana Mountains on the Ortega Highway and up through Riverside to the snowpack on the San Bernardino Mountains is to cross any number of climatic zones, each of which is enjoying a season unto itself. Southern California has a way of reminding you that climate is a function of place and that season is a function of time.A climatic zone may be tiny -- no larger than a damp winter creek-bottom in an otherwise arid landscape. And a season in Southern California may be only a matter of days. One day feels like sodden winter, and by the evening of the next day, the middle-school girls are playing soccer under the field lights, the shriek of the referees' whistles cutting through the warm night air. Summer comes over and over and over. As a result, everyone is equipped to seize it the instant it appears. Back home -- in New York state -- the winter coats are put away with a sense of reluctant foreboding, and only after a good spell of hot weather.I sense the encroaching season here readily enough -- the way a plum-blossom spring overlaps with the constancy of agave and yucca. But I miss the sense of time. The days are longer than they were when we arrived in mid-January. And yet it's hard to feel their lengthening. That's partly because of the orange perma-glow in the urban sky at night. But it's also because of the fact that light isn't the cue that my students, who are keenly and hormonally sensitive to climatic disturbance, are really waiting for.They're waiting -- and the whole region with them -- for warm nights. Here, every night is a convertible night, unless it's pouring. But with real warmth, the stoicism of keeping the top down will give way to the sybaritic pleasure of merging with the biotic city, all those beings feasting on air.Whenever I think of where we are in the year -- on the verge of spring -- I think of home, of our farm north of New York City and the winter it's been having. I can imagine the operatic movement of the light, the way each day reaches a little further into the darkness of evening and morning than the one before.Those extra minutes of dawn and dusk are almost pure emotion at this time of year, as if something had been reclaimed that was in danger of disappearing forever. It's almost as if that place -- its snowy pastures, its huddled woods -- were on a separate globe, pursuing a more elliptical path around the sun than the planet Los Angeles occupies.Emotion is the difference, of course. The irises are in bloom in Southern California. But what is an iris? Back home it's something won back from the cold and the snow, a rigorous assertion that winter may come again, but only by going through summer first.That is not what the irises are saying here. They are blooming with the roses and the oranges and the birds of paradise and the rosemary and the lavender and the camellias. To me it makes no sense, no matter how beautiful it is. To the nectarivorous creatures here -- to bees and moths and hummingbirds -- it merely seems, perhaps, like the slight swelling of their circumstances. Much is blooming now, but then something is always blooming here in this nectared city.Editorial ObserverA haze has settled over Belize City. It may be volcanic dust from Popocatepetl, which erupted a few days ago in Mexico, or it may just be the heat. But from a couple of miles offshore, the city looks like nothing more than an off-white smudge against a thin green backdrop -- all of it nearly lost between sea and sky.The sun is plummeting straight downward. The most forcible objects in view are a pair of enormous cruise ships, which have squared off side by side well offshore. They look as if they're preparing to fire broadsides of bilge and buffet at each other. The haze, from this distance, has divested them of any trace of holiday.An hour ago I was standing in knee-deep water, more than 20 miles into the Caribbean, at the edge of a coral atoll. All day long I had watched shadowy clouds of bonefish slide by me in the shallows. Sometimes they moved quietly, foraging for crabs and other prey. Sometimes a movement spooked them. It could have been me or it could have been the mere thought of barracuda.Earlier that day I'd caught a bonefish, and when I released it I remembered that a bonefish -- Albula vulpes -- is never really wet. You look down at the hand that has cradled it, and it is covered with translucent mucus. A bonefish swims in the slipstream of its own slime. Saltwater never touches its mirrored scales, or surely they would rust.This fishing is all about the eye and its voracity. A barracuda can unnerve everyone in the vicinity with a sideways glance. Bonefish, in turn, are like antelope, in the sense that they seem to live on the light they move in -- the thin, infinitely refracting currents of sunlit surf that pour over the coral flats. Barracuda, bonefish -- they see each other without looking. And there am I looming above them both, staring in all directions, learning again, as I always have to learn when I fish, how not to look, to know what I'm seeing without having to think about it.Sometimes the bonefish are only what my guide -- a cheerful Belizean named Richard Young -- calls ''nervous water,'' a dark agitation on the surface. At their most visible, they come pouring down in schools off of the turtle grass and over the white sands, always seeming to swim downhill, always closing faster than I think they are. I stare and stare. By the fourth day -- the last day -- I can see the nervous water easily. I can see the wakes and the schools and even a lone fish. I can see all these things if I know how far to look and in what direction, which is somehow not quite the same as really seeing them.A couple of days earlier, we had motored up the mouth of the Belize River. Richard said, ''Manatee.'' In my mind, I saw a photograph of a manatee, full profile, taken underwater. I had to look and look before I noticed the light-brown elongated blob lolling just under the surface a few dozen yards away.''Dolphin,'' Richard said, and I saw Flipper. In fact, it was a fin against the far shore, making its businesslike way upstream past the manatee, while trucks rolled across the bridge behind us with the sound of thunder.On that last, hazy day, we made our way in from the atoll, across the astonishing blue deep, over the inner reef a few miles off Belize City and past the cruise ships. Richard turned up Haulover Creek toward the marina, well inland, where he anchors his boat. At first, Belize City seemed to hold itself back from the edge of the creek. But then we slipped under a low bridge and it crowded to the water's edge as if all the life to be had were coming from its brackish currents. The creek was backyard, front yard, thoroughfare and public square. It was dump and junkyard and supply shop. It sank boats and it floated them. Its surface sometimes caught the odor of blossoms and sometimes it trapped a scent that was unnameably fetid.I had spent hours squinting under the sun for a glimpse of a fish that can disappear into sunlight, hours hoping for a glance at its shadow. A bright orange starfish, a black sea urchin, a yellow octopus -- these had been a kind of visual relief.But here on Haulover Creek there was suddenly far too much to look at, too much color, too much life. Nothing was camouflaged. An old woman waved from the river's edge. I would have waved back if I had thought of it. But with so much to look at, I had become invisible.Editorial ObserverNot long ago, I was standing in the chill of a Napa Valley winery, wondering about the analogies of oenology. Several tasters were considering the wine in their glasses. What were their noses telling them? Did they detect the oak -- obvious -- or the blackberry, a little less obvious, or the traces of almond? I remembered some of the more far-fetched comparisons I have read -- the wine that called to a reviewer's mind a suspicion of wet dog or a vintage that suggested saddle leather. Why stop there? Was it terrier or retriever? A hunter-jumper saddle or a cutting-horse rig?I thought of those analogies the other night at a popular Oaxacan restaurant called Guelaguetza on the edge of Koreatown in Los Angeles. We had ordered several of the moles -- thick, complex sauces -- on the menu, including a dense red coloradito, a brick-colored rojo and one called, simply, black. A three-piece band in white suits played near the entrance. Near the back, where we sat, a large-screen TV broadcast a Spanish-language version of ''American Idol.'' The roar of the crowd in the restaurant was nearly opaque.Then I took a bite of the black mole, stolen on the end of a tortilla from my wife's plate. It was a sudden infusion of silence. I tried to understand what I was tasting, but I had no language for it. I had never tasted so many things at once, so perfectly blended, all of them floating on what felt like a charred residue, a mouthful of mourning.I took another bite and suddenly could not help thinking of a time when I was little and the town oiled the gravel road in front of our house. Workers laid the new oil and set out kerosene warning lamps -- dark metal globes with a guttering, smoky flame on top, which were somehow beautiful in the night. Nothing in life should ever taste like that scene, and nothing that tastes like that scene should be worth eating. But so that mole tasted to me at that moment in Guelaguetza: wonderful, tragic, impossible, and burdened by a profound grasp of reality.VERLYN KLINKENBORGAPPRECIATIONSMost museums aren't open at 3 a.m. But at 3 a.m. on the final Saturday of a recent exhibition, crowds were still moving through the California Science Center in Los Angeles, where the show, ''Body Worlds 2,'' had been on display since July 2. It had already been held over, and it was kept open for 62 hours, nonstop, before closing in the early hours of March 28. Security videotapes show that about 3 a.m. on that Saturday, when no one was nearby, two young women reached into a plexiglass case and stole a preserved 13-week-old fetus -- one of a sequence of fetuses in the reproduction section of the exhibition. No one knows whether it was a prank or a protest.I came through the exhibition a day and a half later, in its final hours. A pickpocket might have prospered in the crowds that filled the galleries, but no one could have stolen anything from the display cases without being watched by a hundred pairs of living eyes. Southern California has been enthralled by this exhibition, which now makes its way to Cleveland. Its companion, ''Body Worlds,'' is being shown in Chicago. The exhibitions are the creation of Dr. Gunther von Hagens, a German who developed ''plastination,'' a means of removing fluids and fats from bodies and replacing them with polymers. Some body parts on display -- a coal miner's lung, a metastasized liver -- look essentially like plastic models. But what drew more than 900,000 visitors to the California Science Center were dissected corpses posed in lifelike attitudes: skateboarding, ski-jumping, dancing, roping.In Europe, ''Body Worlds'' shows attracted serious protests from Catholic and Protestant churches. But in Southern California -- at least until early Saturday -- the reaction was essentially blithe. Whether that is a sign of open-mindedness or overpowering curiosity, I do not know. It may be nothing more than Californian comfort with the body in its natural and artificial states. But it was striking to see whole families -- including toddlers -- peering into the architecture of the nervous system, studying the arrangement of bone and muscle, and examining the anatomically unneutered specimens before them.As I walked through the crowd, I tried to imagine what, apart from basic squeamishness, might inspire a protest against the ''Body Worlds'' exhibitions. Perhaps it's a belief that the human body is wholly sacred or should be veiled in mystification, or that the dignity of the cadavers -- mostly polymers after all -- has been violated by public display. To some people, it might be distressing to discover how tiny and unformed an 8-week-old fetus really is. It might be offensive to others, for very different reasons, to realize that people flock to this exhibition because they learned so little about human biology in school.The exhibitions' designers, including Dr. von Hagens, do all they can to blunt these responses. A false philosophical pomp presides over the galleries. Large banners descend from the ceiling bearing quotations from Goethe, Kant and Sartre, but they do nothing to contextualize, say, a skinless cadaver with its head split open and posed as a ''lassoer.'' But what really blunts the visceral and emotional responses of the audience is the utter absence of death.That may sound like a strange thing to say about a display of some 200 flayed corpses, their muscles peeled back, brains exposed, nerves articulated. But what makes the exhibition palatable is the entire strangeness of the objects on display. We see these bodies, with one or two partial exceptions, after dissection. Identity -- familiarity -- has been shed with the flesh. The connection between the polymerized bones and arteries on display and the living bones and arteries in the bodies of the audience feels merely analogous. The athletic postures these cadavers assume also hide death from us. What is missing is a series of plastinated cadavers that show the progress from the moment after death until dissection is complete. That would allow viewers to witness the continuity between their own warmblooded coherence and the alien objects on view, a far more intimidating prospect.The real ground for protest here -- for dismissal, that is -- is a sense of emptiness. The ''Body Worlds'' creator says the exhibitions' purpose is ''health education.'' And in the absence of detailed, factual, unembarrassed health education in American schools, that claim makes a certain sense. But there was surprisingly little knowledge on display. The posed cadavers are merely curios, reminders, at best, that the foundation for our knowledge of the human body was revealed through autopsy -- a word that means seeing for oneself.Like everyone else, I came to see the plastic dead. But I found myself watching the living. The personhood of those cadavers had long since been discarded, but it beat strong in the people who came to see them. Death is not a neutral fact, not to any of us. But all of the grace and beauty, intelligence and athleticism to be found at this exhibition was there in the living humans, who were still at some unknowable distance from death and still rejoicing at that fact, whether they knew it or not.Editorial ObserverWhere are the natives the nativest? That question, in not quite that form, has been on my mind ever since I got to Southern California in mid-January. It's easy enough to find examples of all the familiar stereotypes here, if only because attitudes, like automobiles, do not rust in this climate.But what I've been looking for is the place where Southern Californians seem most instinctively at home. Is it Doheny Beach, where a young girl skims and swirls in a pool of saltwater left behind by the tide? Is it the courtyard of the Norton Simon Museum, where an elderly couple sits watching the water irises? Is it the drive-through line at the In-N-Out, where a pair of cops in their cruiser feel as burgerish as the rest of us?The answer, I've decided, is the carwash, especially on a Sunday afternoon. But saying ''the carwash'' in Southern California is a little like saying ''the pub'' in England: it raises important questions of class, identity and belonging.You can, of course, find carwashes here that resemble those in the rest of the country: quarter-fed do-it-yourself high-pressure-spray washes. But what I mean is the 100 percent hand-wash joint on the corner, the one with a line backing onto the street on weekends.For weeks, I drove past our local carwash without turning in, certain, as only a New Yorker can be, that I would be ignorant of some secret protocol and make a fool of myself. But the secret of Southern California is that, except in a few circles, there are no secret protocols.The only trick question the attendant asked me when I turned my car over to him was what kind of air freshener I wanted. The answer, of course, was none. He handed me a ticket to take to the cashier, and a team of men armed with vacuum hoses fell upon my vehicle.This moment of surrender is a more powerful version of what happens when you give your car over to valet parking in, say, Brentwood or Santa Monica. I think, in fact, that it may be one of the most profound psychological moments in a Southern Californian's week.A car is many mythic kinds of creature in this auto-mad part of the world, but it is also a burden, a load that is very hard to lay down. To drive into a carwash and surrender your car is an almost celestial release. It is the mechanical form of an out-of-body experience. You are with your car and without it.At my carwash -- this is how I think of it now -- the real point is to accentuate that feeling, while scrubbing the freeway grime off the side panels and brushing the painted ladies, a suddenly plenteous butterfly, off the grille. I stand at the long viewing window, waiting for my car to come around the corner and onto the track that guides it through the wash.A few people sit in booths, eating burritos or hot dogs from the carwash cafe, while they watch their cars go past. Two men scrub the windshield with long-handled brushes. Another team soaps down the tires and rocker panels. Then comes a rinse, and the wax spray begins. It looks as if the cars are being frosted in birthday cake colors, green and pink and blue.The walls near the front of the carwash are crowded with small automotive adornments for sale: steering wheel covers and license-plate frames and, unaccountably, an enormous selection of greeting cards. Here, too, is the cashier and a door leading out to a tented terrace with benches and tables and chairs.Nearly everyone who comes to the carwash knows that timing is everything. You watch your car go down the automated interior wash-and-spray track for a minute or two. Then you pay your bill and take a seat outside.On a Sunday afternoon, the terrace is crowded. One man reads The New York Times. A pair of young women in white dresses look as if they've come to the carwash directly from church. Most people simply spend the time watching the work at hand. No one looks impatient.It's a beautiful day. The mountains gleam in the distance, and a ceramic fountain -- a peasant boy and girl flirting near a well -- gurgles nearby. Soon a man drives my car out of the building and over to the men who will finish the job by hand.He drives with the driver's door open. His left foot hangs outside the car. It looks like a matter of convenience, but it's really another way of signifying the special state of being my car is in. The casualness -- that dangling left foot -- is a way of saying that my car has never belonged as wholly to me as it does to him at this moment. This, too, is somehow gratifying.In the lot, perhaps two dozen cars are being spritzed and hand-rubbed by some two dozen men. An arm goes up out there in the lot. A red rag twirls in the air. My car is ready.Editorial ObserverTwo hundred fifty years ago, on April 15, 1755, Samuel Johnson published the first edition of his Dictionary of the English Language, compiled and written almost wholly by himself. It appeared in London in two folio volumes. Like most dictionaries, there is a rigorous serenity in the look of its pages. The language has been laid out in alphabetical order. The etymologies and definitions bristle with italics and abbreviations. The quotations that exemplify the meanings of the words present a bottomless fund of good sense and literary beauty.But I wonder whether anyone has ever had a more dynamic or volatile sense of the language than Johnson did. We tend to remember him as an older man, grown heavy, his face weighed down as much by indolence as industry. But in April 1755 he was not yet 46. With the publication of his dictionary, he returned from his researches into the English language the way an explorer returns from the North Pole, with a sense of having seen a terrain that others can see only through his account of what he found there. Instead of a wilderness of ice, he faced what he called, in his preface to the dictionary, ''the boundless chaos of a living speech.'' Instead of voyages into Arctic waters, he talks of ''fortuitous and unguided excursions into books.''It's tempting to think of a lexicographer in terms of the dictionary he produces, and Johnson's is certainly one of the great philological accomplishments of any literary era. But it's just as interesting to think of what the dictionary does to the man. Johnson says, quite simply, ''I applied myself to the perusal of our writers.'' But reading ''our writers'' to find the materials for a dictionary is unlike any other kind of reading I can imagine. It would atomize every text, forsake the general sense of a passage for the particular meaning of individual words. It would be like hiking through quicksand, around the world.Johnson lived in turmoil, and the sense of vigor he so often projected was, if nothing else, a way of keeping order in a world that threatened to disintegrate into disorder every day. And what was the disorder of London to the chaos of the language? ''Sounds,'' he wrote, ''are too volatile and subtile for legal restraints; to enchain syllables, and to lash the wind, are equally the undertakings of pride.'' Johnson published his dictionary not as the conqueror of the language but as the person who knew best how unconquerable it really is.VERLYN KLINKENBORGAPPRECIATIONSIn Montana, the one thing worse than a dry winter is a dry spring. It multiplies disappointment. The hills, already ashen, come into April looking autumnal. The wind is as sympathetic as a boot heel. Clouds of dust rise up behind the plows on wheat and potato ground. The fields blow east with each pass of the tractor and disc. So does the water from the big irrigation pivots. Where developers are laying out new housing lots -- all around Belgrade and Bozeman -- the wind does what it can to scour away any memory of the grassland that preceded them. The snowpack in the mountains will barely meet summer's needs. The drought is a bad debt, compounding itself day by day.It's not as though the people here look parched. But you can see a tightness in the faces of the ones who feel the force of that water-debt. It's visible in the old men with long memories eating breakfast at the Blue Anchor in Twin Bridges. I caught a glimpse of it driving southwest of Bozeman when the wind caught a stack of plastic trash bins in the pickup ahead of me and blew them out onto the road. I pulled over and helped the driver, who was wearing spurs, reload them into his pickup. The wind snatched at us and tore our words away. A game warden stopped to talk to me on the Beaverhead River. ''I'm getting tired of the wind,'' he said. He kept his back to it as he spoke. I sat beneath the willows, watching the river, listening to them howl in the gale overhead.There had already been snow that week -- half a foot, highly localized, barely enough to lay the dust. The earth drew it in as thirstily as one of the Angus calves at his mother's udder in the river pastures near Alder. But a day or two later a general rain began, widespread, preceded by hail in some places. It rained through the night and turned to snow by early morning, a bleak snow where it lay under the cold illumination of yard lights. The cattle stood in long lines where the ranchers had fed hay. In a sheep pen along the highway, most of the sheep had made room for themselves under a flatbed trailer to keep out of the wet. Sandhill cranes stood motionless with their heads bowed.There was no sitting among the willows on the Beaverhead that day. The only way to stay warm was to walk the river, watching for bugs and fish. Fat robins stood on the tops of metal fence posts and chided me as earnestly as a kingfisher. A pair of northern harriers coasted over the willow tops and then rose on the breeze into the bleached cottonwoods and above. In the back channels of the river, soft ice had begun to form. It was almost exactly the color of the clouds hanging just overhead, still dropping snow that pattered against my rain hood. On land, I felt clumsy and encumbered. My boots gathered snow underfoot and the brush caught at my clothing. The way to move was through the water, along the shallows, crossing as needed.There were still pools deep enough to drown a man, but the river was very low, like almost every stream in the mountain West. The high-water mark on the bridge pilings was a dozen feet and more above the current flow. It was easy to see how the river had withdrawn itself, retreating from the dry rock beaches, revealing the cuts it made against the earth banks. In normal years -- whatever they are -- the Beaverhead runs flush with water later in spring, and in summer it carries a head of water from the dam above for the irrigation diversions along the stream. But the last couple of summers the stream flow has been cut to a bare minimum. It's hard to measure how a change like that affects a habitat as complex as a river. But one measure is the bugs.I had come with my friends to the river hoping to find a small mayfly. The conditions were perfect -- low clouds, falling snow, highs in the mid-30's. At some point during the midafternoon we should have seen the emergence of a generation of mayflies, slate-gray insects perched high on the river-film as though the river had somehow crystallized into millions of winged invertebrates. When that happens, the trout begin to feed on the mayflies, and suddenly the river maps the position of every fish. But we saw at best a few hundred of the insects we had come to see, not enough to bring the trout to the surface. It is likely that the low water of the past couple of summers has affected the mayflies as surely as it has affected the farmers and ranchers.It was tempting to think that all that snow was somehow contradicting the drought, but if so, it was only in the way that a comma contradicts the flow of a sentence. The forests on the upper slopes of the Tobacco Root Mountains were burdened with white. The sage growing above the riverbanks looked almost aquamarine under the snow. But it will take long winters of snowfall and slow, wet summers of rain to repay this debt, to rebuild that population of mayflies. When it happens, if it happens, they will rise off the river again like flakes of ash among the snow.Editorial ObserverLike many Apple computer users, I'm in a pleasant state of expectation. I've ordered Apple's updated operating system, but it hasn't yet arrived. I have housecleaning to do before I can install it: deleting dead programs in my applications folder, for instance, and backing up my hard drive. Then will come the almost visceral pleasure of installing new software. This is one of the most pleasant tasks I know, vastly easier than straightening up the barn or taking the truck in for service.Somewhere at home I have the floppy disks of many previous upgrades, including versions of MS-DOS -- the first Microsoft operating system -- that date from the early 1980's. They are reminders of how strange the idea of software seemed to me at the time. It did not occur to me then that such strangeness was part of living in a hardware world.The only way to upgrade the refrigerator or the vacuum cleaner is to buy a new one. I can think of nothing I owned at the time that was capable of taking in new instructions and using them to improve its operation substantially. The only thing that could do so was not a machine at all. It was a human being.There have been some profoundly ungratifying upgrades, of course. That's why computer experts recommend backing up your hard drive before you upgrade, so you can return to a prior state if you have to. There's nothing quite like that in the hardware world either. There's something especially winning about the idea of taking a snapshot of the present so you can return to it if the future doesn't work out the way you want it to.Until a few years ago, the release of a new version of Windows would cause a splendid national frenzy. Millions and millions of units were wrapped and shipped and received with a nervous excitement. It was, in those days before huge multiplayer online games, the closest possible thing to a collective computer experience. And then the fun went out of it, after too many versions, too many software patches in rapid succession and, worst of all, the uneasy sense that an upgrade could turn into a can of worms.Apple has not been perfect either, its imperfections amplified by a customer base as curmudgeonly as it is fanatical. But to me, coming from that other world, upgrading Apple software feels almost redemptive.When Tiger comes, I'll open the shipping box and tear off the shrink-wrap. But then I'll have to remember that inside the box, there will be only a disk or two. (The days of printed manuals are long gone.) I'll slip the disk into my computer, agree to the provisions of a contract I haven't really read and then sit back, waiting until the moment I can restart my computer and see what these pristine new instructions contain.Editorial ObserverMy time in Southern California is nearing an end, and suddenly I am thinking about what I thought I'd find when we arrived four months ago. The freeways were what I had imagined most vividly, and with a certain amount of anxiety. In January I drove down into the Los Angeles basin for the first time in 30 years. It felt, somehow, like a scene from ''Fantastic Voyage,'' the tale of a microscopic submarine on a rescue mission deep inside a scientist's body. This bit of dialogue says it all:Grant: ''If we can't go back, is there an alternate route?''Michaels: ''Yes. We can go forward on this course, but it means going directly through the heart.''Going directly through the heart is how it felt, though now that I look at the route we took -- along the Foothill Freeway to the eastern edge of Los Angeles County -- I see that we pretty much stuck to the outer reaches of the lymphatic system.When we did drive directly into the heart a few days later, it came as something of a pleasant letdown. After 3,000 miles of winter driving en route to Los Angeles, stop-and-go traffic on the 405 was just stop-and-go traffic, not nearly as bad as driving through the sucking and gusting of the tractor-trailers on the windblown, waterlogged crest of I-40. That, of course, was before the freeway shootings began.There have been at least seven attacks in the last 10 weeks, four of them fatal, the worst outbreak of apparently random freeway shootings in the Los Angeles area since 1987, when five people were killed. It has taken awhile for the news to soak in, but last Sunday's shooting seemed to tip the balance.You could hear the descriptions -- four or five men, black Honda, shaved heads -- whenever you stopped to listen. What people said had everything to do with where they were. If you were northbound on the San Diego Freeway near North Hills about the time the shooting took place, you were entitled to feel you'd had a narrow escape, whether or not you heard any gunfire or saw any shaved heads.These shootings change the very idea of the freeway. I was surprised to find, after a few weeks here, what a release I feel when I accelerate down the on-ramp and merge with the flow of traffic.I've been struck by the attentiveness and skill of the drivers around me, by the fact that nearly everyone signals a change of lane and tries to keep a reasonable distance between vehicles. In three months of freeway driving here, I can count on one hand the number of times I've heard a horn sounded in anger. And now I know why.If nothing else, these good driving manners express the centrality of the freeway system in the consciousness of Southern California. I've begun to think of those lanes as a giant public square spreading all across the city, a square where most people try to contribute their mite of civility in hopes of keeping the overall experience as tolerable as possible. But there's another way to look at it. The civility on display may reflect nothing more than the profound hostility lying just below the surface.As a friend from Fullerton puts it, you drive politely, without challenging other drivers even implicitly, because ''they're packing.'' No one honks because no one wants a fight. People use their turn signals to say, as innocently as possible: ''Changing lanes now! Not cutting in! No disrespect intended!''There is something insidious about the promise of these freeways. The release I feel when I slip into fifth gear and hit 75 is fleeting. There is no lighting out for the territories in these lanes, only the discovery that you've entered a different version of civil society, as constraining and limiting as any you find on the surface streets. Sometimes the traffic locks up solid. Sometimes -- every bit as maddening -- it moves in clots and pulses. That is enough to drive some people crazy.But these shootings change the underlying psychology of driving here. Taking the on-ramp onto the freeway means accepting a certain degree of unintended randomness, putting up with the fact that accidents happen. These shootings involve something very different: a randomness of intent. It feels as if no amount of care or vigilance or respect for other drivers will protect you.Secretly, everyone wants to believe that the shootings have been motivated by violations, however slight, of automotive honor. That would leave the rest of us on our best behavior, which is pretty much where we already are.What we really fear is that they are genuinely unmotivated. If that is true, then suddenly we all live in a very different neighborhood.Editorial ObserverOver the past few months, any number of old memories of Los Angeles have come back to me. Most of them are not really memories of the place as it was 30-some years ago, when I last lived in the area. They are memories of illusions of the place, a forgotten chronicle of sightings, rumors, hauntings and strong impressions. The otherness of other lives always weighs heavily on my imagination, and to drive, as a young man, along elevated freeways, peering out into the palm-dotted neighborhoods that lay beyond them, was to be overcome by other lives. Los Angeles seemed far stranger to me then than it has these past few months. The difference may be age, but it may also be Los Angeles.It was, for one thing, a less respectable city, as I remember it. It was the great city for starting over, a place where respectability was a commodity, where you could repair your respectability or ditch it, once and for all. I had relatives who tried both, who became school teachers and settled comfortably into the middle groove, or who turned John Bircher and stopped paying income taxes. You never knew how that city would take an Iowan. The realm of possibilities in Los Angeles -- the only realm that mattered -- also seemed somehow to be measured against an intractable scale of values. People always seemed to be moving up or down, not only in wealth or status, but also in the moral freight their lives carried. The city made room for every version of those lives, far beyond any glimpse I ever had of them.You can still find enough moral friction in Los Angeles if you look for it. Plenty of people still save a little vitriol for people who live those other lives. Los Angeles is still a city where a bad toupee or just the wrong lipstick sets off entirely different reverberations than it would in New York. It's still a city where you get too many plausible glimpses of what would happen if your life went off the rails and it became a struggle to keep up appearances to the outer world, whether or not you could keep them up within yourself.But it's a different city now. It has an earnestness and a tolerance it once lacked. Everyone aspires to own a house, but there is no agreement on what the lives being lived in those houses will look like. What passes for American culture has been divided and subdivided, split into hundreds of channels, and reinvented in thousands of ways. A few blocks of tract houses or turnkey mansions -- it makes no difference -- may turn out to contain dozens of one-family neighborhoods that agree on only one thing -- the day the trash goes out. Here, a way of life is a way of life. Social Darwinism no longer means survival of the fittest in a hierarchy of social values. It means adaptation in a world where the only value is adaptation.In 30 years, though, some of the underlying illusions of this place have changed very little. There is still a profoundly American faith in the exceptionalism of the present generation. I happen to have spent the past few months on the edge of one of the fastest-growing counties in a region called, nowadays, the Inland Empire. It looks as though a giant walked the landscape, and wherever he set foot a big-box retail mall sprang up from the earth and around it streets and streets of houses built by enormous corporations. The houses crawl over the hills and up to the edges of ravines. They roll over the desert and infringe upon the wetlands and grasslands. And yet the people who occupy them are still surprised that theirs was not the last development.This is a feeling that is not merely Californian, not merely a product of Los Angeles or the Antelope Valley or Norco or Temecula. Americans have always had the one good story to tell -- the next city, the next county, the next house -- and no one really knows yet how to tell the modern version of the other story, the one where the frontier collapses in upon itself. Perhaps one version of that story is simply this -- the respectability of the settled regions suddenly coexists with the violence, the lawlessness of the real frontier, and both change as a result. We know how that story goes when it is told as a Western. I think we're only figuring out how it goes when it is not a story at all but a fact of life being worked out as new houses cascade outward toward a final limit where there is no longer room or money or tolerance for more new houses.I like, somehow, to remember the stories of that one Los Angeles relative of mine -- the one who went right-wing. I saw him only a few times after that transformation. There was no particular bitterness in his voice. He knew how to talk about other things. He had come to a place where he could fit in while not fitting in. I think that was his secret. He knew that Los Angeles was no frontier for him, that it was not so much a question of starting over as of finishing up. There were plenty of open fields in the Iowa he left. Los Angeles was the place to forget them.Editorial ObserverA couple of weeks ago my dad pointed out that there is only one major route out of California over the Sierra Nevada if you are north of Bakersfield. That road is Interstate 80. Other roads cross the mountains, but in a tentative, almost exploratory way. Eighty is the way in and the way out. The roadway has been blasted with cold and heat. And if, while you're climbing it, you happen to remember, as I did, that this is the one eastern crossing out of northern California, the route somehow seems unduly fragile, cutting its way through time.It was fitting to have to beat my way out of the state against a headlong storm of rain and wind just a few degrees above ice and snow. The weather sounded an appropriately epic note for the beginning of a drive across country. And yet when we made it down at last into Reno and past Sparks and out into the open sea of sage, it struck me once again how un-epic the trip has become. I always tend to think of the whole crossing at once -- from California to upstate New York. But out in the open of Nevada, heading north to Winnemucca, for instance, the sense of the whole slips away, and there we are, on a well-paved, empty patch of road, as if we were driving only from a nearby ranch exit -- ''No Services'' -- to the neighboring town.Driving across Nevada, a few names cling as you pass -- Pumpernickel Valley, Starr Valley -- but what sticks in your mind is the look of the country, the floating hulks of far-off mountain ranges to the north and south. The Humboldt River was over its banks along much of the route. There was water standing everywhere, and the mountains in the distance were still thick with snow. Where there were cattle, they stood deep in the new grass.Sometimes, dropping into one of those valleys, I caught sight of a double track making headway straight across the sage and disappearing in the distance. It might have been made by a pickup, but I imagined it was made by an old ox-drawn wagon. It was another one of those encounters with an inconceivable past, a moment when the pure obstinacy of humans rises up in all its force. Rolling along at 70 miles per hour with perfect cellphone coverage and the sound of a recorded book filling the cab of the pickup, I was nevertheless struck by how suddenly we could drop into the here-ness of place simply by pulling over to the side of the road, turning off the engine and walking off the asphalt.I wondered whether those earlier travelers, whose greatest threat was slowness, not speed, were ever overwhelmed by the particularity of the ground they covered, or whether they kept their minds leaning constantly forward. A trip is always an abstraction, in some sense, a way of diverting attention from the step after step, the mile after mile.The sun blinded us on the wet salt flats the next morning. On the eastern side of the flats, we watched fence lines slowly disappearing under water. We made the circuitous trek across Salt Lake City, up into the Wasatch Range and finally onto the western flank of Wyoming, where we were to pause for a week.I always think of the westward side of the Wind River Mountains as the back side, because I know them best from the east. From the back side we could see that they were still deep in snow. In the days to come the temperature climbed into the lower 80's, and every creek in that part of the country came near to spilling over. Watching a muddy river choke itself with debris was like watching the mountains make their way down to level ground. The ranchers shook their heads, seeing all that water slide by.I've driven across this country I don't know how many times now, but every time I've done so, I have been crossing, of course, a particular era. The vehicles change, and the companions. So do the calculations of risk and security, of urgency and cost. But always, in this western half of the drive, I get to a place -- maybe Deeth, Nev., or Green River, Wyo. -- where, thanks to simple emptiness or the echo of a historical moment, I can pretend that this landscape will never look much different than it does at the moment -- at any moment. A little drier, a little wetter, perhaps. Somewhere in the midst of that illusion I allow myself to think about America.Editorial ObserverI got used to the permeability of our house long ago. In and out we come all day long, and so do the dogs -- to the pastures and the corral, to visit the ducklings and goslings in the horse trailer, to admire the new gilts in the hog pen, to feed the chickens and gather eggs. We learned early on to leave our boots in the mudroom and to check ourselves for ticks at night. We like the bats that nest in the eaves, and we don't so much mind the chipmunks that sometimes disappear through the cracks in the foundation. We no longer really hear the sound of mice and flying squirrels in the walls at night. We all seem, somehow, to live in each other's margins.But the other day I found a forest tent caterpillar climbing a computer cable in my office. The creature had ridden one of us into the house. Its presence was oddly revolting, if hardly surprising. Forest tent caterpillars are everywhere this season. I find them on the fence rails. They drown in the duck tank.Wherever the hand naturally goes -- to a gate latch or a bucket handle -- it is sure to find forest tent caterpillars, sometimes the tiny ones, barely an inch long, as thin as a tightly spun yarn, and sometimes the big ones, two inches and nearly as fat as a pencil. Considered solely as a contrivance of nature, they can be quite beautiful. A line of ivory-colored keyholes runs down the back, and the sides are demurely brushed with an eye-shadow blue.But I rarely think of the caterpillars this way, not during an outbreak as serious as this one. I brush them off my shoulders and hat and sunglasses as I mow the pasture. I shake them off the windshield wipers to keep them from being squashed against the glass.And every now and then I come upon a tree where they have massed on the trunk, a somber congregation of caterpillars holding themselves still along the bark while one or two, around the edges, twitch with the promptings of some holy fire. In such numbers, they actually look like bark, as though the surface of the tree might begin to writhe.I don't know why this causes such revulsion in me. Forest tent caterpillars don't bite human flesh, they don't stink, they don't carry diseases, and they aren't personally unhandsome. It isn't the thought of their numbers -- millions and millions of them from the upper Midwest eastward -- or the extensive defoliation they cause. But everywhere they go they lay down trails of silk, as though they were wiring the woods. A high wind brings them kiting down from the leaves, suspended in midair. To walk outdoors these days is to wind oneself in their gossamer, as if you were being spun into one of the yellow cocoons they leave behind. I watch closely to see if the poultry will eat them. Some days the birds seem like our last line of defense.VERLYN KLINKENBORGThe Rural LifeWeather is not primarily a moral affair. We do not deserve a long, slow patch of hot weather, like the one that sat on the city in early June, any more than we deserve the extraordinarily beautiful evenings that have come with these longest days of the year. Deserving has nothing to do with it. The weather comes, it goes, and sometimes it's occluded. The days of seeing the wrath of God in a prolonged drought or a heavy windstorm -- believing that bad weather chastens our bad actions, in other words -- are pretty much past. One sobering irony of global warming is the thought that it threatens to make weather moral again in a very different way.But these are thoughts too puzzling for the fine weather of these last few evenings, when it is almost impossible not to feel that this has come to us by right -- as our due after a run of sticky days and as the best of what the month of June has to offer anyway.These are the nights for stoop sitting, not in long-suffering, as though we felt the curse of Cain on our shoulders, but like the young man and his dog I passed the other evening. Both sat quietly, watching the street. You could tell that what they were really doing was feeling the shape of the cool air around their bodies. It would have been a pleasure in itself, but it was all the more pleasurable for the memory of that hot spell.On a long, horizontal evening, when the whole sky seems to have slipped westward, New York becomes a different city. The weary tension embedded in a heat wave has slipped away, and a kind of expansiveness comes over the neighborhoods again, as if people could suddenly see and hear each other again now that the stale air has been dispelled.I took a taxi up Central Park West the other night, and at every block, a small colony of neighbors from the buildings nearby had settled under the trees and on the benches in the park. The temperature was in the mid-60's, and the sky in the west was breaking up in a way that was part Remington and part Turner. A pair of schoolgirls playfully slapped each other on a bench while the boy next to them stared at his cellphone. The light from the streetlamps drifted down upon them.This is a city of stone and metal, but it's softened by the fact that we live in a world of probabilities, not certainties. When the hot weather squelches us, and New Jersey disappears in the brown fug, it's easy to become grateful for the simple fact that the earth revolves, setting up currents that will eventually blow this stuff away.Of course, the long, cool nights will blow away too, much as we would like them to linger. And when they do, we will wake to a different city yet again.VERLYN KLINKENBORGThe City LifeImagine Walt Whitman as he imagines himself, stretched atop a load of hay, one leg reclined on the other, seizing the clover and timothy, rolling head over heels, tangling his hair full of wisps. And then imagine the farmers -- puzzled Long Islanders perhaps -- and the oxen at the wagons watching that ecstatic performance. ''What is that you express in your eyes?'' Whitman asks the oxen, which might ask the same of him. ''More than all the print I have read in my life'' is his answer.The untitled poem from which these lines come -- later called ''Song of Myself'' -- was first published in ''Leaves of Grass,'' which appeared for sale on the Fourth of July 150 years ago. It's a poem, I'm tempted to say, that still surprises, all the compliment being contained in the word ''still,'' as if America had outrun Whitman long ago and left him breathing hard along the side of the road. But wherever we pull up in our own race, breathing hard ourselves, there is Whitman, as loose-limbed and joyous as ever, moved more by the ecstasy of perception and empathy than by any physical effort. There is no catching up with him. He is always ahead of us.The Whitman of that great poem is a holy fool, a sprite, a personification able to be everywhere at once, thanks to its immaterial nature. But there has never been a spirit so aware of his sinews and veins, so good at loafing and river-bathing and arousal. The body Whitman inhabits is as inclusive as his mind and feelings. ''I find I incorporate gneiss and coal and long-threaded moss and fruits and grains and esculent roots,/And am stucco'd with quadrupeds and birds all over,'' he writes, as though he were the subject of a strange Renaissance portrait.We read in all this the largess of the man, who turned himself from a mild-mannered journalist -- Walter Whitman -- into a superman of sorts. It is one of the most profoundly successful acts of self-characterization in all of literature. But in the largess of the man we are also supposed to read -- and still do, I think -- the exuberance of America itself. The Whitman who celebrates himself finds it easy enough to stay ahead of us, who perhaps sometimes feel that life, as he puts it, is ''a suck and a sell, and nothing remains at the end but threadbare crape and tears.'' That is what really keeps Whitman out in front after 150 years: the America he inhabits in ''Leaves of Grass.'' We have not gotten to it yet.The place is as real as the poet can make it, peopled with figures like the butcher boy who ''puts off his killing-clothes, or sharpens his knife at the stall in the market,'' before breaking into a shuffle and breakdown. It is crowded with canal boys and one-year wives, with machinists and slaves and drovers. Missourians cross the plains, and patriarchs sit at supper with their progeny, and trappers and hunters rest under the shade of canvas or adobe. Whitman is among them all, touching them, drinking and sleeping with them, waking in the night to speed, as he says, ''with tailed meteors.'' And he decides, as he reports in the prose introduction to ''Leaves of Grass,'' that ''the Americans of all nations at any time upon the earth have probably the fullest poetical nature.''It is our feeble illusion that there have only been Americans since the continent was first settled by Europeans and only here and that they have not necessarily had the fullest poetical nature. Whitman sets us right. There have been Americans everywhere and at all times, he announces. But how are we to know them? One way is by their resemblance to the poet, free-spirited, frank, afraid of neither the flesh nor the spirit. The Americans Whitman means are like the animals themselves. ''They do not sweat and whine about their condition,/They do not lie awake in the dark and weep for their sins.'' The sensuous energy they embody harmonizes perfectly with their practical energy.They also believe that the great poets extend an invitation to them, as Whitman does. ''Come to us on equal terms,'' he writes, ''Only then can you understand us, We are no better than you, What we enclose you enclose, What we enjoy you may enjoy.'' The very manner of Whitman's verse reinforces that invitation. It turns no one away. ''You should have been with us that day round the chowder-kettle,'' he urges, and it's true. We should have been. We would know something about the boatmen and clam diggers even Whitman cannot tell us. We would know something more about the poet and ourselves.One hundred and fifty years on, this poem has not even begun to tire. It wakes us to the moment of our being and to the place in which that moment is passing. It halts us in our haste and makes us look down at our bodies without reluctance. It leads us to a country whose genius ''is not best or most in its executives or legislatures, nor in its ambassadors or authors or colleges or churches or parlors, nor even in its newspapers or inventors  but always most in the common people.'' Up the road, we can always glance Whitman ahead of us. ''I stop some where waiting for you,'' he writes. ''If you want me again look for me under your bootsoles.''Editorial ObserverWhen it feels like time -- no matter what the clock says -- I walk the horses down to the night pen from the pasture where they've spent the day. Our habits mingle on that walk. I whistle when I open the gate. Their heads turn abruptly to the sound. I rattle the grain in the bucket, and, if they show any reluctance, Remedy the gelding begins to drive the other two horses toward me. Ida makes a feint toward the pigs in their enclosure, and they dart in circles round and round, barking and snuffling as they go. I lead the horses down the drive and into the corral, never looking back to see whether they follow or not. It's part of the contract. They trot the last few steps and settle over their sweet feed.This is the fly time of year. We spray the horses, and some days they wear mesh face masks to keep off the flies. I look out in the pasture, and there are our horses, strangely disguised as if for some long-ago game show. But nothing really keeps the flies away. On the bad days, I walk into the night pen just ahead of the horses, and the flies that have enveloped them suddenly envelop me. I swat them away, thinking all the while that it's a case of mistaken identity. I'm not a horse, I think. But at a moment like that, the distinction is academic. To the flies, I am a horse, a particularly pale, thin-skinned, succulent one, and lacking a horse's ability to quiver its skin in just one spot. In that moment, the sense of human separateness slips away.It happens again and again here on this farm. Every day, for example, I make a point of sitting on the threshold of the portable pig house in an effort to make friends with our two young Tamworth gilts. We're going to breed them, and we want them as tame as they can be before that time comes. Every day, they ease up to me a little sooner. Yesterday I could touch them on the forehead. In a month, they'll flop on the ground to have their bellies scratched.There is still an elemental distrust in their eyes. They stand broadside to where I sit, looking sideways and a little backward toward me, as if they were positioning themselves to breeze right past if I made a sudden move. But they turn and rub their wet, flat noses against the knuckles of my hand. They glance at me and then drift away, grazing as they go. I sit and watch them, hoping to find the grain of their domesticity, the way to enlarge their trust. But I can see in the look they give me -- the almost human gaze -- that they are studying me too, waiting to discover how dependable I really am.VERLYN KLINKENBORGThe Rural LifeEver since May, a small black-and-white billboard has looked south into Times Square from the top of a building on Broadway. It says simply: ''PETA Kills Animals.com.'' You would think that the visual chaos of Times Square would hide a modest black-and-white sign. But if anything, the colliding planes of color in the foreground -- the pulsating staircase of signage -- make this reticent billboard all the more visible.Like an increasing number of the signs around us, this one merely points to another source of information -- in this case, to a Web site whose name sounds like a headline: PETA Kills Animals. PETA, of course, is the activist animal-rights organization People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals. The sign assumes we know this and that an organization devoted to the ethical treatment of animals probably should not be killing them. But the sign also raises the question, what is PETA Kills Animals.com?It turns out that this is one of a series of Web sites sponsored by the Center for Consumer Freedom, which describes itself as ''a nonprofit organization dedicated to protecting the full range of choices that American consumers currently enjoy.'' We live in an age of organizations with anodyne names that conceal their real agenda, and the Center for Consumer Freedom is one of them. We're all consumers, and what could be better than freedom? But C.C.F. was founded by a Washington lobbyist named Richard Berman and is financed, according to at least one watchdog group, by many of the same meat, fast-food, restaurant and beverage companies that have hired him as a lobbyist. Seed money came from Philip Morris.C.C.F.'s reasons for attacking PETA are obvious. When it comes to limiting ''the full range of choices'' that Americans are used to finding at the supermarket, it is hard to beat an organization that opposes nearly every imaginable human relation with animals, including, of course, eating them. I hold no brief for PETA, which seems to me to be wrongheaded about as often as it is right-minded. But it has made common cause with more-thoughtful organizations in opposing the contemptible practice of raising animals like hogs and chickens -- the source of most Americans' meat -- in close confinement. And it is probably capable of defending itself in a billboard war.What strikes me is C.C.F.'s mission description and its implications. Here is the rest of its statement: ''In addition to malicious animal-rights activists, we stand up to the 'food police,' environmental scaremongers, neo-prohibitionists, meddling bureaucrats and other self-anointed saints who claim to 'know what's best' for you.'' There's a hidden equation lurking in this sentence. It assumes that your interests -- as a free consumer -- are synonymous with the interests of corporations that are being closely watched, and often openly opposed, by organizations like the highly respectable Center for Science in the Public Interest, a lead advocate in the fight against obesity.In fact, the language of the Center for Consumer Freedom is as Orwellian as it is possible to get. Its basic linguistic strategy could have been taken directly from George Orwell's ''Politics and the English Language,'' still the most important single essay on how to lie without seeming to. It would hardly work for C.C.F. simply to tell the truth -- to say to consumers, on behalf of the food and beverage industries, ''Activists and watchdog groups are trying to stop us from selling you anything we want to sell you.'' Much better to say, ''These groups are trying to prevent you from buying anything you want to buy.'' Then it becomes a matter of sustaining freedom, protecting individual rights and keeping the prairie of consumer choices unfenced.The blurring of the distinction between corporate interests and the individual and collective rights of humans is one of the central tropes of our time and the source of much purposeful confusion, of the kind that the Center for Consumer Freedom exploits. It may have its root, philosophically, in the legal fiction that a corporation is a person. But it is used again and again to hide from people exactly how their interests are being abused. It also keeps people from seeing the delicate balance that must be struck between their individual rights and the rights of the community at large. When you hear someone howling about freedom, it is worth asking whose freedom he means.Protecting ''the full range of choices that American consumers currently enjoy'' can only be the mission of someone who believes that those choices come without cost and that the only ethic that matters is the bottom line. But every consumer choice carries a cost, and the purpose of a real consumer advocate should be to make those costs -- both moral and financial, to oneself and to others -- perfectly clear. That, of course, is something that industries profiting from the untrammeled appetites of Americans cannot afford.Is it hypocritical for C.C.F. to attack PETA? Since its basic rhetorical strategy is hypocritical, the answer is almost certainly yes. Is it hypocritical for PETA to euthanize dogs and cats, as C.C.F. claims it does? Only if you believe that the ethical treatment of animals never includes euthanasia. The obvious retort to PETA Kills Animals is PETA Saves Animals. But that doesn't make much of a billboard.Editorial ObserverOne of the reasons I moved to the country was to try to have a more deliberate awareness of time. I imagined a sugar maple coming into bud in spring, then leafing out and darkening into the overshadowing presence a maple becomes in midsummer. I imagined watching it lose its leaves in fall and somehow banking what I'd seen, as if those images would help me experience time more fully.But I had no idea how much time the country contains. I thought the seasons would come and go and that that is what I would pay most attention to. Instead, I find myself watching what the seasons leave behind.When we moved here, nearly eight years ago, an old honeylocust loomed over the vegetable garden. Its ashes have long since been spread. A pair of white spruces are beginning to tower over me, though I planted them as whips. There are finally apples -- 11 of them -- on young trees not far away. The posts in the rail fence beside them have just about reached the end of their useful life.I think of myself, naturally enough, as the still point amid all this change. My leaves never fall. If I lie fallow for a while, I'm not suddenly overcome with nettles and vagabond hollyhocks, as is the vegetable garden. The ducks and geese molt, the horses hair up and shed, but my coat is constant.I have banked nothing, or everything. Every day the chores need doing again. Early in the morning I clean the horse pen with a manure fork. Every morning it feels as though it could be the day before or a year ago or a year before that. With every pass, I give the fork one final upward flick to keep the manure from falling out, and every day I remember where I learned to do that and from whom. Time all but stops. But then I dump the manure on the compost pile. I bring out the tractor and turn the pile, once every three or four days. The bucket bites and lifts, and steam comes billowing out of the heap as though I had set it on fire. It is my assurance that time is really moving forward -- and decomposing us all in the process.  VERLYN KLINKENBORGThe Rural LifeLast month a team of paleontologists announced that it had found several fossilized dinosaur embryos that were 190 million years old -- some 90 million years older than any dinosaur embryos found so far. Those kinds of numbers are always a little daunting. Ever since I was a boy in a public elementary school in Iowa, I've been learning to face the eons and eons that are embedded in the universe around us.I know the numbers as they stand at present, and I know what they mean, in a roughly comparative way. The universe is perhaps 14 billion years old. Earth is some 4.5 billion years old. The oldest hominid fossils are between 6 million and 7 million years old. The oldest distinctly modern human fossils are about 160,000 years old.The truth of these numbers has the same effect on me as watching the night sky in the high desert. It fills me with a sense of nonspecific immensity. I don't think I'm alone in this.One of the most powerful limits to the human imagination is our inability to grasp, in a truly intuitive way, the depths of terrestrial and cosmological time. That inability is hardly surprising because our own lives are so very short in comparison. It's hard enough to come to terms with the brief scale of human history. But the difficulty of comprehending what time is on an evolutionary scale, I think, is a major impediment to understanding evolution.It's been approximately 3.5 billion years since primeval life first originated on this planet. That is not an unimaginable number in itself, if you're thinking of simple, discrete units like dollars or grains of sand. But 3.5 billion years of biological history is different. All those years have really passed, moment by moment, one by one. They encompass an actual, already lived reality, encompassing all the lives of all the organisms that have come and gone in that time. That expanse of time defines the realm of biological possibility in which life in its extraordinary diversity has evolved. It is time that has allowed the making of us.The idea of such quantities of time is extremely new. Humans began to understand the true scale of geological time in the early 19th century. The probable depth of cosmological time and the extent of the history of the human species have come to light only within our own lifetimes.That is a lot to absorb and, not surprisingly, many people refuse to absorb it. Nearly every attack on evolution -- whether it is called intelligent design or plain creationism, synonyms for the same faith-based rejection of evolution -- ultimately requires a foreshortening of cosmological, geological and biological time.Humans feel much more content imagining a world of more human proportions, with a shorter time scale and a simple narrative sense of cause and effect. But what we prefer to believe makes no difference. The fact that life on Earth has arrived at a point where it is possible for humans to have beliefs is due to the steady ticking away of eons and the trial and error of natural selection.Evolution is a robust theory, in the scientific sense, that has been tested and confirmed again and again. Intelligent design is not a theory at all, as scientists understand the word, but a well-financed political and religious campaign to muddy science. Its basic proposition -- the intervention of a designer, a k a God -- cannot be tested. It has no evidence to offer, and its assumptions that humans were divinely created are the same as its conclusions. Its objections to evolution are based on syllogistic reasoning and a highly selective treatment of the physical evidence.Accepting the fact of evolution does not necessarily mean discarding a personal faith in God. But accepting intelligent design means discarding science. Much has been made of a 2004 poll showing that some 45 percent of Americans believe that the Earth -- and humans with it -- was created as described in the book of Genesis, and within the past 10,000 years. This isn't a triumph of faith. It's a failure of education.The purpose of the campaign for intelligent design is to deepen that failure. To present the arguments of intelligent design as part of a debate over evolution is nonsense. From the scientific perspective, there is no debate. But even the illusion of a debate is a sorry victory for antievolutionists, a public relations victory based, as so many have been in recent years, on ignorance and obfuscation.The essential, but often well-disguised, purpose of intelligent design, is to preserve the myth of a separate, divine creation for humans in the belief that only that can explain who we are. But there is a destructive hubris, a fearful arrogance, in that myth. It sets us apart from nature, except to dominate it. It misses both the grace and the moral depth of knowing that humans have only the same stake, the same right, in the Earth as every other creature that has ever lived here. There is a righteousness -- a responsibility -- in the deep, ancestral origins we share with all of life.Editorial ObserverEarlier this summer, I e-mailed my brother a list of the animals we're raising on this farm. I called it an inventory, but it was really a way of acknowledging that perhaps my wife and I have gone too far. There are now five pigs in various stages of growth, and a large, comic parade of ducks and geese that settle onto the lawn like so many ships in a green sea. There are chicks in the basement and chickens in the mulch. And there are the longtime partners in this enterprise, the horses, dogs and cats. My brother -- who has three pigs and four goats himself -- wrote back and said, ''Wouldn't it be great to know the real inventory?''That phrase has stuck in my head for the past few weeks. What I had sent my brother was a list of the animals that Lindy and I are responsible for -- the ones we need to feed and water every day. But I hadn't even begun to count the creatures here that are responsible for themselves. Even among those, the animals I think of first are the ones that, from my perspective at least, have a direct relationship with us: the phoebes that nest above the kitchen door, the fox that steals hens from our coop from time to time, the wild turkeys that troop down out of the woods and into the pasture in winter, the red-tailed hawks that screech overhead, driving the poultry to cover. There are others, of course: hummingbirds in the bee balm and hollyhocks, pileated woodpeckers in the deep woods, catbirds in the elderberry. But these too belong to a circle of animals that seem scaled to human powers of observation.What makes the real inventory interesting is all the rest of the organisms that live on this place, whether I notice them or they notice me. There are times when I get a vague sense of how vast that inventory might be -- nights when the crickets sound like a ringing in my ears, evenings when the low sun is refracted in the wings of the thousands of insects in flight over the pasture. But it is still only a vague sense, a catalog of life forms whose numbers I have to guess at. Somehow I instinctively imagine the abundance of life here in the shape of a pyramid -- the kind of illustration that might appear in a schoolbook -- with a pair of humans at the peak and the legions of soil bacteria at the base.But one of the things I've learned from living in the country is that life is not a pyramid with humans at the peak. It's an interrelationship that is far too complex to diagram so anthropocentrically and so simply. There is a map of need here that I cannot read but that governs me as well. I go about the endless tasks, the chores, the feeding and grooming of animals, and I pretend that somehow I'm separate and in charge, though the pigs and geese remind me that that is not exactly true. I have to remember that if I wrote up the real inventory, it would include myself as well.  VERLYN KLINKENBORGThe Rural LifeIn 1953, a young documentary filmmaker named Charles Dee Sharp traveled down the Mississippi River, shooting still photographs for a film he never made. One of Sharp's pictures -- recently published by the Center for American Places in a book called ''The Mississippi River in 1953'' -- is a color shot of rows of new red cornpickers awaiting shipment in Moline, Ill. Behind them the surface of the river looks like a sheet of mercury. Those cornpickers, long since antiquated, could harvest only two rows of corn -- in the cob -- at a time. They were scaled to much smaller farms and lower yields than you find in the Midwest these days, where fields are now harvested by enormous combines that shell the corn as they pick it.Those old pickers -- so bright and new in 1953 -- are a visual reminder of the vital, complex connection between America's agricultural heartland and the Mississippi River. In a good year, like 2004, the Mississippi smoothly ferries some 60 percent of the corn and soybeans bound for export downriver to the Port of New Orleans. And in a year like 2005 -- well, there has never been a year like 2005. There has been serious drought along the river's tributaries, the Missouri and the Ohio, and that has resulted in low water along the main stem of the river as well. Industrial traffic has been slowed considerably, and portions of the Ohio have been temporarily closed.And then came Katrina, which essentially disabled the Lower Mississippi for shipping, halting the southward movement of grain for export and other farm products and the northward movement of farm inputs like fertilizer and fuel. Last week, the Coast Guard began lifting some restrictions on navigation on the Mississippi well above New Orleans. But navigation aids have been torn out of the river further south, and power has not yet been fully restored to the grain-handling facilities along the river.What this means for farmers is yet another year of crisis, and possibly one of the worst in a long time. In an ordinary year, a drop in corn production -- like the 12 percent slump forecast for Illinois this year -- would mean better prices in commodity markets, but a real loss on the farms. But farmers in the Midwest, where the harvest is just beginning, are going to be looking at an unexpected glut of grain with nowhere to go.Each week some 35 million bushels of export corn moves through New Orleans. That has come to a complete stop. Americans tend to think of farmers as producers, but they are also enormous consumers of fuel and petroleum-based chemicals. They will be paying much higher prices for those products, like the rest of us, for some time to come.This fall is going to see a big drop in farm revenue and a big increase in farm expenses, at a time when the federal government is trying hard to curb farmers' appetite for subsidies. Once again, any movement toward limiting federal price supports will be overwhelmed by emergency funds needed to cover losses.Katrina has reminded all of us, all too vividly, that the Mississippi is a complex chain of dams, locks, cutoffs, ports, channels, levees and navigational markers, rather than a natural river. And when the river system comes to a halt, compromising the well-being of every farm or business that lies economically upstream of the actual water itself, the only real concern must be to get the system going again. Yet the system is so complex that it is easy to lose sight of the hidden hydraulic system of the river itself.We tend to think of the Mississippi as breadth and depth and flow, the qualities that float those long chains of grain barges downriver. Sometimes -- only rarely -- the surface traffic stops. But the river never does, and it carries with it, especially in spring, the outwash of all those fields along all those tributaries.The traffic in grain is carefully regulated and monitored. The traffic in topsoil and all the chemicals that have been applied to it on Midwestern farms is not. The result is an oxygen-deficient dead zone in the Gulf of Mexico. This year that zone, which can grow to the size of New Jersey, began to appear in March instead of June. There has been some speculation that Katrina's turbulence may have stirred the gulf enough to help break up the dead zone. But in the long run it will make no difference. Beneath the surface economy of the Mississippi River, there is an agricultural economy that is steadily eating away at those same farm fields and steadily killing the gulf.Editorial ObserverIt is just an illusion, of course, but it seems to me that the very faces in Mike Disfarmer's photographs -- now on exhibit at two Manhattan galleries -- have gone out of fashion as surely as the hairdos and print dresses and pressed overalls his subjects are wearing. For nearly 50 years, Disfarmer, who died in 1959 and whose real name was Meyer, took studio portraits of the people in and around Heber Springs, Ark., a small town north of Little Rock. But these are not ordinary photographs. It is as if the farmers and housewives and soldiers heading off to World War II in these prints found themselves in the studio of a 19th-century daguerreotypist. They are framed with a quiet, stern formality that captures a passionate individuality in each of them as well as their response to the camera, and to the strange man standing behind it.The faces are burned and worn. The arms hang long and heavy. Some of Disfarmer's subjects have been caught off guard, as if they had never seen themselves in a mirror before, much less in a photograph. Others know the poses and the gestures that a camera is supposed to elicit. But given the setting, a shallow footing against a blank backdrop bathed in northern light, it is astonishing how fully these people reveal themselves. They have chosen their own parts, and they play them superbly -- the three Verser brothers all in uniform, the nine daughters of Mary Bullard, Earl and Violet arm in arm.Each of these photographs strikes me as the midpoint in a story we do not know -- stories, perhaps, that we do not even know how to tell any more. You can see in these prints the surprising grace of a clumsy man, the unexpected beauty of a plain woman. You can feel the labor almost everyone here has known. What I wonder is this: If you could somehow put the people of Heber Springs, circa 1940, into modern costume and modern hairdos, would they look like us? And if you put us in the clothing of that time and did those extraordinary things to our hair, would we look like them? Or would we look -- so unworn, so at ease -- as if we were only pretending?VERLYN KLINKENBORGAPPRECIATIONSOne of my favorite E.B. White essays is the one called ''Memorandum,'' which he wrote 64 years ago this month. I never understood it until I'd been living on this farm for a while. ''Memorandum'' is simply White's list of the things he ought to do on his own much larger farm along the coast of Maine. The essay begins with the words ''Today I should'' and it ends not because White has run out of things that he should do but because it's getting dark, and his piece is already plenty long.What drives that essay isn't so much White's sense of the endless tasks and duties that have piled up. It's the knowledge of October. Every warm day, every day without rain or a killing frost, feels like an opportunity stolen from harder weather. And in the opportunity of a warm October day you suddenly feel the somber pressure of the coming season. White never says it, but ''Memorandum'' is about the pleasure of not doing the things that need to be done. He is talking about resisting October by refusing to think of it as the foreword to winter.It would be better to have done all those things that needed doing. I would like to have gotten the lower pasture re-fenced this summer, and right now, like White, I need to take up the chicken fences and think about where the pigs will go when the ground freezes. I need to bring the wood scraps from the back of the barn up to the house for kindling and get the log-splitter back under cover. I could go on and on with this list, but you're better off reading White's. It was -- as farms go -- a more interesting time. And there is something very pleasant in reading a list of chores from 64 years ago. Not one of them needs doing today.So why don't I get up and do the chores while the weather's good? And why didn't White stop typing and at least -- at least! -- ''carry a forkful of straw down to the house where the pig now is.'' There is the writer's work, for one thing. But there is also the counterpoise of all those tasks that need doing. For the moment, it feels better to put everything off. The fog is low to the ground these mornings, and in the lower pasture a sugar maple that has already turned casts more light than the sun. It's going to rain for a few days. And when the next good day comes, what needs to be done here will no longer be merely a matter of should.VERLYN KLINKENBORGThe Rural LifeIn the summer of 1868, Charles Darwin and his family visited the poet Alfred Tennyson and his family on the Isle of Wight. The visit -- and the visitor's ideas -- troubled Tennyson. ''What I want,'' he later told a friend, ''is an assurance of immortality.''This was an astute remark. Many of Darwin's readers, then and now, have tried to find ways to reconcile a divine creator with the clearly secular implications of Darwin's theory of evolution. As often as not, the effort is less a search for a first cause than a plea for assurances of immortality. Tennyson recognized that Darwin's ''On the Origin of Species,'' which was published in 1859, offered no such promises.What bothered Tennyson wasn't merely the possible loss of eternity. It was also the central observation that underlies Darwin's theory: the fact, first noticed by Malthus, that every species on the planet, including humans, produces far more offspring in each generation than nature can support. Coming as late as we do -- nearly a century and a half after Darwin's ''Origin'' -- we have the luxury of seeing at a glance what Darwin saw: that the pressure of so much excess population is a harsh but efficient test of the value of accidental variations in any species.We can say, with Thomas Huxley, ''How extremely stupid not to have thought of that!'' But, of course, Darwin did not simply think of it. He prepared for years to be ready to think of it when he did. It is one thing to see the logic in evolution, as stated on the page. It is something entirely different to have pieced together such an astonishingly powerful theory -- a word that, as scientists use it, means an explanation of the facts as we know them -- from the details of nature itself.The new exhibition called ''Darwin'' at the American Museum of Natural History portrays the making of the man and the scientist, and it reminds us how well and how fully evolution explains the life around us. It also captures the way Darwin's theory opened an entirely new window in the human imagination.It is possible to say, in fact, that humans did not begin to understand their place in nature until 1859. I found myself wondering, oddly, what it must have been like to be alive at such a revolutionary moment. But we live in a moment that is no less revolutionary. ''Our ignorance of the laws of variation is profound,'' Darwin wrote. In our time -- the DNA era -- the mechanisms of those laws have been revealed in ways that Darwin could only dream of, and in ways that confirm the essentials of his theory beyond a shadow of a doubt.This exhibition is useful, too, in reminding us that the controversy over evolution -- over a true understanding of the human place in nature -- has been more or less constant since 1859, though it has reached a peak of political absurdity only in our own time. The basic objections to evolution -- the ones trumpeted by the proponents of so-called intelligent design -- are essentially the ones Darwin described in the sixth chapter of ''Origin.'' They have been given a new language, and new examples have been adduced. But Darwin did a surprisingly good job of forestalling his critics. He showed that most of the objections to his theory, then as now, were based on a misunderstanding of the evidence or the nature of his argument, or were owing simply to the fact that so much remains to be discovered about the workings of life on Earth.One comes away from this exhibition with a reawakened sense of Darwin's characteristic honesty and his extraordinary powers as an observer, qualities that are as much an attribute of the scientist as of the man.Darwin presented the strongest, most detailed argument and evidence for evolution that he could. He also carefully presented the strongest objections to his theory that he could. Under a century and a half of close examination, his theory has grown more and more solid -- with refinements, of course. Under the kind of scrutiny that Darwin bestowed on himself, the notion of intelligent design vanishes in a puff of smoke like the bunkum it is.''I do not attack Moses,'' Darwin once wrote, ''and I think Moses can take care of himself.'' But the problem is not Moses, or Jesus or God. It is humanity itself. To the extent that the furor over evolution represents a cultural crisis in America -- and only in America -- it is a crisis of credulity, not faith, a crisis rooted in neglect and ignorance.To lose the assurance of immortality is a serious thing, if it were ever ours to have. At the end of the ''Origin'' Darwin famously wrote, ''There is a grandeur in this view of life.'' There is also an apologia in that phrase. He knew how hard it would be for us to see ourselves truly.Editorial ObserverNow that it's winter outside -- wind chill in the single digits, ice and snow on the ground -- I can feel again where the cold air leaks into this house. A couple of weeks ago, I began pulling apart the walls in the oldest part of the house, the mudroom and the laundry room. What I felt, as I worked, was a forensic hostility. The laundry room, for instance, had been built around the washer and dryer, making it impossible to replace them without taking the room apart. So I took the room apart. I found what appears to be the oldest beam in the house, dating, perhaps, back to the late 18th century. I found miles and miles of BX electrical cable. And I found the cold spots, which I am slowly plugging.Perhaps the most satisfying part of all of this has been burning the house from within. By the time I finished tearing out the laundry room, which was renovated sometime in the 1980's, there were stacks of scrap wood on the deck. I have enjoyed cutting them up and feeding them -- nails and all -- to the woodstove.I try to imagine the carpenter who framed in that room and its cupboards and closets and how solidly he did his job. He stinted nothing when it came to lumber and nails and, especially, screws. In the evening, lengths of his handiwork crackle in the fireplace. In the morning, those dry scraps get the woodstove roaring in no time.Behind all that work -- all that Sheetrock -- there is another house and another set of lives. When we reroofed the house a few years ago, the contractor reported that there had once been a serious chimney fire. The other day, I found its scars on an old log beam hidden above the false ceiling in the mudroom.I wish that the house were more articulate, or that I were better at hearing what it has to say. I can hear the most recent occupants pretty clearly -- they obviously hated the thought of exposed wooden beams and brickwork. But the ones who lived here before them, all the way back to the first settlers, are nearly inaudible to me.I often marvel at the decisions the previous owners made. We have, for instance, enough wiring hidden in the walls for a commercial office building. I wonder who will marvel at the decisions that I'm making now. The trouble is that you can see only what remains -- not what has been erased. When I'm finished with my work, an era in the life of this house will have vanished, gone up in smoke while keeping us warm. I'll rebuild, as best I can, from the bones of the house outward.Meanwhile, I get to burn the house from inside. Think of it as a controlled chimney fire. I add another 2 by 4 to the flames, and I imagine those terrible scenes from bitter wars and bitter winters -- breaking up the furniture to keep warm. They say this will be a hard season coming. But what do they know?VERLYN KLINKENBORGThe Rural LifeI am not a list-making person. There is a list of reasons, but I'm not about to make it. Something eludes me in the 1. 2. 3. of it, the a. b. c. of it. I have known a few great list-makers, among them my stepmother. She used to keep a daily record in the form of penciled lists on a neatly folded square of paper. It accorded almost exactly with my sense of her character -- not a moment was to be wasted and the best way not to waste a moment was to map out the day ahead as if she were keeping a ship's log of the immediate future.I suppose I would be much more productive if I made more lists, as long as being productive means making more lists. But the philosophical difference between making lists of things that need doing and actually doing them is simply too immense for me. My incapacity may have something to do with being a writer. When I put words on paper, I have actually done something. It is my work. The idea of putting words on paper that would cause me to do some other kind of work seems, if anything, counterproductive.When I do make lists, there is usually only one reason. It is to figure out which item on my list is the thing that's keeping me from getting all the other things done. I think of this as a cut-to-the-chase list. Somewhere in the column of things I need to do is the one thing I have secretly been worrying about, the one that arouses a sickening mixture of guilt and anxiety. It could be calling the accountant or going to the dentist or answering the e-mail I should have answered a month ago. The ultimate cut-to-the-chase list is, of course, the one that none of us really bothers to write down: 1. age, 2. die.December, of course, is the season of lists, when the enormous, interlaced construct of our culture collapses into a pile of top tens, top dozens and top hundreds. Call it filtration if you like. Technically, these are not to-do lists. Their imperative content is low. Take, for instance, The New York Times Book Review's list of 100 notable books, a survey of the best reading of the past year by people who knew all along that they would have to come up with a list at the end of it. It is recommended reading, not required reading.Then why do I feel the notable books list nagging at me? Perhaps it's the hundred-ness of it. There's a lot to be said for top-one lists. But it's also the feeling that I'm steadily losing ground against the swell of highly recommended contemporaneousness. I've read x of the books on this list and have another x in a pile by my desk. I'm looking forward to reading them. But over the years I've collected any number of reading lists from The Times and many other sources. I have entire lifetimes of recommended reading stacked up in list form. I'm not gaining ground on those lists either.Everywhere you turn this time of year you find lists that offer to pull the calendar year into hierarchical perspective. It's bad enough in the conventional media. But in blog-land -- as on Amazon.com -- the list is king. The very notion of a blog is built, in some sense, on self-indexing -- on chronicling the ins and outs of information, keeping the archives on top and transparent, making the past, as well as the present, immediately available. This is a recipe for endless end-of-year list-making, some of it happily idiosyncratic, but much of it merely daunting. Late last month, for instance, Information Leafblower released its collaborative list of the 40 best bands in America. I consider it a personal triumph that I have actually heard of 20 of them. But I can feel the waters closing over me.The only recourse is to pursue your eclectic, ecumenical way, disregarding, as best you can, the confetti of cultural advice that flutters down from the rooftops this time of year. It is the blizzard of immediacy, the hurricane of advocacy. I went to the movies in Times Square the other night, and as I was coming out of the theater I passed an electronic kiosk displaying Entertainment Weekly's list of ''20 Things We Like.'' At least I think it was 20. There was nothing random in that list, of course, since it is a form of paid advertising. But it's only a single step from a kiosk like that to a billboard-size list of lists constantly flickering in Times Square, an endless stream of ''Things We Like'' and Notable Books and best-ofs glowing on high -- an electronic Sinai awaiting its Moses, who would come down from it with the Top Ten Commandments in hand.EDITORIAL OBSERVERI can never quite get over how different the world looks at 3 a.m. It's the same old world, a few degrees colder though no darker than it was when I went to bed. But a squall blew through while I was asleep, and now the ground is covered with dry new snow. The car starts sluggishly. I sweep it off with a broom from the porch, clumsily, as if I had forgotten overnight which-handed I am. The tires squeal on the snow -- it is 3 degrees -- and I turn onto Highway 14, which will take me northwest from Ucross into Sheridan, Wyo., and to the interstate. The highway is a smooth white plain. There is one set of car tracks on it, heading the other direction.Nearly everyone who drives this stretch of road keeps a watchful eye out for deer. The lower few miles are paved with red asphalt, and in daylight the ice patches on the highway look like pools of blood, reminders of how many deer die on this road. And in the miles into town I see dozens of deer tracks in the fresh snow, the traces of their crossings in just the past few hours. The tracks are all nearly perpendicular to the road. No dawdling for these deer, no deciding, like New Yorkers in a snowstorm, to wander down the middle of the road because there's snow on the ground. These deer know their business, whatever business it is that draws them across the highway.I had driven down from Billings, Mont., three days earlier, just in time to catch the midafternoon dusk of a cloudy day. The cattle stood out against the snow-blown hills like inkblots. I'd never realized how perfectly a flock of sheep is camouflaged against snowy rangeland with the brown grasses still poking through.Horses of every description, all of them looking strangely old and swaybacked in their winter coats, grazed in the brush. They are experts at finding that one break in the wind -- a line of round bales, a billboard -- and that one ray of sun. They stood there as if waiting for night to absorb them.Sometimes the clouds thinned just enough to throw their blue light onto the dark brow along the hills to the southeast, like stained glass letting the sun through. I thought again what I often think when I come west at this time of year: that winters in the East and West are really two different kinds of beasts.Winter where I live in New York seems to come out of the woods like a white wolverine, stealthy, barely visible till it is right upon you. But winter in Montana and Wyoming -- especially on the Crow Reservation and the open ground east of Sheridan -- is another creature altogether. It comes not on foot but on the wing, nothing as domestic as the wild turkeys in the stream bottoms or even the hawks along the telephone poles. It's something more feral still, able to set off a worry in you when you sense how limitless it is.I had to put aside that worry at 3 a.m., driving into Sheridan. I hit a blinding squall of snow, and it was enough work just to concentrate on keeping to the middle of the road. Every ranch light seemed like hospitality itself. After a while, I could make out the lights of Sheridan, like a false dawn beyond the hills. One car went by me, coming from the other direction. I stopped for coffee in town, where the stoplights were flashing, and then took to the interstate.The snow had let up, to just a fine drift of flakes out of the sky. And as I headed north, past Acme and Ranchester and Dayton, I kept seeing the same illusion. Every light in the distance -- yard lights, headlights, the lights of the engine on a coal train coming my way -- seemed to throw a focused reflection, a separate beam of light, straight up into the sky. Every pickup or semi seemed to be shining one headlight upward, and the farther away they were the clearer the illusion seemed. It was just light reflecting off the snowflakes, of course. But on this early winter morning, it seemed much stranger than that, as if I had blundered into a world where it made sense for traffic to trace its route along the underside of the clouds.You get up at 3 a.m., and it seems as if it's going to be 3 a.m. forever. But the minutes slip away with the miles, if slowly, and soon it was 4 and 5 and 6, and I was getting close to Billings. The darkness barely let up, but by the time I got within sight of the city its lights had mingled with true dawn: just the backlit gray of a snowy winter morning, but enough, at last, to show me the fence lines and the windblown grasses above the snow again. And there, too, were the horses, back from wherever they go when the night absorbs them.Editorial ObserverFirst comes the river crossing -- the cab yards and storage facilities north of the river, the unexpected light, even on a dark night, from the city reflected in the water. Then comes 125th Street and the run of blocks leading south to the maw of Metro-North, the place where the train slips into the tunnel of its own rail clatter on the long descent to Grand Central. I used to be one of the passengers who stayed seated until the end of the trip, happily reading or dozing or dwelling in blankness. But now I get up as soon as we reach the tunnel. I stand by one of the doors. I watch the darkness slip past.Usually there isn't much to see until the very end. But the last time I came into the city, there were fluorescent lights on the last dozen blocks. Perhaps the light was for track work, or perhaps we'd been routed down a corridor I'd never seen before. The train slowed to a foot pace. We slipped past brick arches that joined the rail bed and the ceiling. They had been blackened by time and the passage of so many trains. They dripped in the dim light with water from the streets above.Through the arches and across another set of tracks I could see a long wall of massive stonework, stone after stone laid artfully in place. The arches looked like something from a Roman aqueduct, but the wall beyond them looked like the fortifications of a still earlier world -- bluff, defensive, not to be removed within the knowledge of the coming generations. It was easy to imagine the masons at work on the brick arches. But just who had shaped that wall? How long had it stood there? Exactly what was it holding up?What always strikes me as we slip into Grand Central -- shunting, screeching, swaying, slipping laterally from track to track until that last smooth glide down the platform -- isn't the questions as much as the possibility of answers. The brick arches give way to concrete arches and on each one someone has chalked a number. Someone knows what those numbers mean. Sometimes, in the darkness of the tunnels, you can see a cluster of huge circuit boxes with conduit worming its way out into the city. Someone knows the map of those circuits. And then, just as you can begin to see across the platforms and feel the breadth of that underground entrance, there is a heart with the words ''Frank Loves Alice'' written inside. Does anyone know any longer who Frank and Alice are?VERLYN KLINKENBORG